# **INTRODUCTION.**<br /> ORIGIN AND NATURE OF THE EXPEDITION. {#intro .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: align-center
NOTE
::::

:::: { .fs-xs .break-after }
The nomenclature and geographical spelling adopted in this book are those of the
Indian Survey and of the English Royal Geographical Society. As a matter of
facet the native names have not always been transcribed with fixed rules of
transliteration, owing to the impossibility of finding in the European alphabet
signs which correspond to the Indian vowels. Short c is sometimes transcribed by
u and sometimes by a. whereas n is transcribed at times as oo and at times as n.
Thus we find written indifferently Jhelam and Jhelum, Jammoo and Jammu, etc.

Despite these and a Few other uncertainties, it is better to preserve the more
usual names as they are spelt on all European maps. By writing, as some authors
do, Dschelum for Jhelum, Satledsch lor Satlej, Dschemma for Jummoo, and so, we
can only succeed in perplexing the reader even by the best-known names. Colonel
Burrard, the well-known Director of the Indian Trigonometrical Survey, rightly
observes that for geographers, uniformity of spelling is more important than
accuracy.

With a few exceptions, vowels have the same sound as in the Latin languages.

The words right and left, with reference to rivers and valleys, are to be taken
in the true geographical sense, independent of the direction of march; whereas
upon cols and passes they ave given with reference to the position of the
observer.
::::

:::: { .w-50 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_003.jpg ""){#b003}
::::
HIS Royal Highness Prince Luigi Amedeo of Savoy, Duke of the Abruzzi, was
induced to set out upon this new expedition chiefly by his desire to contribute
to the solution of the problem as to the greatest height to which man may attain
in mountain climbing.

Physiologists have long given their attention to a study of the effects of
reduced atmospheric pressure upon the human system, whether in balloon ascents
to great heights or by confinement in rooms contrived for the artificial
diminution of the pressure of the air. The result of these experiments appears
to show that life is possible under atmospheric pressure reduced far below the
limit marked by the barometer on the highest summits of the earth.

The very nature of the scientific experiment, however, which is to reduce each
phenomenon to its simplest terms. deprives this conclusion of all possible value
as a forecast of the solution of the problem which interests the mountaineer and
the geographer.

For this problem is complicated for us by the length of the sojourn at low
atmospheric pressure; by the severe physical exertion inevitable in high
ascents, and often protracted for days or weeks; by extremes of temperature and
other special conditions of climate, whose action upon the organism is still
obscure. And all these are factors which influence the physical and mental
condition of the explorer in varying degrees. The solution cannot, therefore, be
based upon scientific reasoning, but only on direct experience. Up to the
present time the result of experiment has been a slow but uninterrupted progress
toward the attainment of the greater heights; and there is nothing to show that
we are reaching a final limit. From the first ascent of Mont Blanc (15,780 feet
above the sea level) at the end of the eighteenth century up to the present day
we have gained 8,820 feet. It is not much; but we must remember that most of the
expeditions in question had for their object rather the exploration of distant
and unknown regions than the ascent of the high peaks which those regions might
contain. Again, such undertakings are possible to very few men. They require
profound technical experience of geographical exploration and long and costly
preparations, since they are made in uncivilized or uninhabited regions where it
is necessary to carry a complicated and heavy equipment to a great distance;
where it is not possible to find natives who are expert in glacier and rock
work; and where, on account of these drawbacks, it is very difficult, even
impossible, to transport camp material and the necessaries of life above a
certain height.

The result is that explorers often deprive themselves of comforts needful to
ensure due rest from fatigue, to protect themselves from cold, or even sometimes
to furnish sufficient or suitable bodily nourishment. Thus they reach the spot
where the maximum effort is required of them with their forces already
diminished by overstrain and suffering from the lack of everything beyond the
mere necessities to which they have reduced their equipment. In the end the
highest peaks may turn out to be very difficult to climb, or even entirely
inaccessible, because of the condition of the rock or glacier. All these
material obstacles, combined with bad weather and the shortness of the seasons,
have up to now done far more than diminished atmospheric pressure to limit the
activity of mountaineers in this special field of great altitudes.

The giant ranges into which His Royal Highness the Duke of the Abruzzi led his
expedition were not kind to him, nor was the weather favourable. Nevertheless,
he succeeded in making a step forward toward the conquest of the greatest
heights after such a struggle as is perhaps unexampled in the history of
mountaineering. This was, however, but the last stage of a campaign which was
rich in mountaineering and exploring work for the purpose of collecting data for
the more accurate knowledge of a system of ranges that, taken all together, is
perhaps the grandest in the world. The expedition lived for over two months on
the Karakoram glaciers. It brought back a large number of photographs of the
group, a topographical survey of a portion of the high glacier basins, many new
altimetric measurements and meteorological data systematically collected, and
new glaciological and geological observations, as well as the experience of a
long sojourn at low atmospheric pressure on the part of both Europeans and
natives.

To reach the Karakoram the expedition had to cross the vast mountainous region
which lies between Kashmir and Chinese Turkestan, taking a different route each
way. The country through which they passed is known only in its general
outlines, and its ethnological, climatic and geological characteristics are
peculiar to itself, In the course of my narrative I shall mention the principal
problems which this strange region propounds to the traveller.

Let me close my brief account of the objects of the expedition by a word of
thanks in my own name and that of my companions to Hts Royal Highness the Duke
of the Abruzzi, to whose energy, will, decision and power of organization we are
indebted for the rich memories of hew experiences we have brought back with us
from our journey.

:::: align-right
FILIPPO DE FILIPPI
::::

Rome, *October*, 1911.
:::

:::: align-center
****
::::
