# CHAPTER II<br /> FROM MARSEILLES TO SRINAGAR {#two .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Preparations for the Expedition. — Alpine Guides and Porters. — The Most
Favourable Season. — Equipment. — From Marseilles to Bombay.— The Railway
Journey. — Rawal Pindi. — Ekkas and Tongas. —The Road to Kashmir.— The Jhelum
Valley. — The Kashmir Custom House. — Uri. — The Gorge of Basinagul. — Baramula.
— Kashmir. — Lacustrian theories and Legends. — Disagreements among Geologists.
— Arrival at Srinagar.<br /><br />
::::

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_014.jpg ""){#b014}
::::
HIS Royal Highness the Duke of the Abruzzi prepared his expedition between
February and March, 1909. He invited to take part in it his aide-de-camp,
Marchese Federico Negrotto, Ship’s Lieutenant R.I.N., whom he entrusted with the
topographical work of the expedition; Vittorio Sella, whose task was to
illustrate by photography the scenes through which the expedition should pass;
and myself as physician and to collect natural history specimens so far as might
be possible on so rapid a march. The number of members of the expedition was
limited by the great distance which would have to be traversed beyond the limits
of civilized means of communication, the difficulties of transport to be
expected in the mountains, and the importance of light marching order to make
the most of the brief season during which mountaineering would be possible. On
the other hand, it seemed advisable to bring a fair number of European guides
and porters, as the Duke’s African experience warned him not to count over much
upon native portage in the high mountain region—all the more as the distances to
be crossed upon the ice were infinitely longer in the Karakoram than in the
Ruwenzori range.

For these reasons seven Italian guides and porters were chosen from Courmayeur^[^0200]^,
in the valley of Aosta. First, Joseph Petigax, the devoted and faithful
companion of the Duke of the Abruzzi upon all his expeditions, together with his
son, Laurent, who had already been tried with his father in the Ruwenzori
expedition. Both father and son had been guides to Dr. and Mrs. Workman in their
exploration of the Chogo Lungma glacier of the Karakoram in 1903. The two other
guides, the brothers Alexis and Henri Brocherel, were also familiar with
Himalayan travel, as they had been on two expeditions in the Kumaun-Gahrwal with
Dr. Longstaff, exploring in 1905 the Nanda Devi group and the Gurla Mandhata,
and in 1907 acting as guides to Longstaff in his fine ascent of Trisul (23,406
feet). To these we must add three sturdy porters, thoroughly acquainted with the
glaciers of Mont Blanc—Emil Brocherel, Albert Savoie and Ernest Bareux. As on
former occasions, Sella again brought with him Erminio Botta, at once
assistant-photographer, guide and porter, and deeply versed in camp life and in
foreign mountaineering.

The most important consideration for any Alpine expedition, especially in remote
countries, is the choice of the right season. The Karakoram is so remote from
the plains of India and is divided from them by such wide and high mountain
ranges, that the climatic seasons of tropical regions, if felt at all, must be
felt in greatly modified form. Judging from the experience of the few explorers
who had preceded us, it was to be feared that the chief hindrance to
mountaineering in the Karakoram would come from the extreme instability of the
weather.

In 1892 Sir Martin Conway, exploring the three main glaciers of the Karakoram
between May and the beginning of September, experienced hopelessly bad weather,
never having more than four consecutive fine days. It was not until September
that the weather became fair, and this improvement was attended by intense cold,
high wind and short days.

During their repeated expeditions to the western Karakoram and up the Chogo
Lungma, Hispar and Biafo glaciers, the Workmans experienced steady bad weather
throughout July and August, with the  exception of their last Journey in 1908,
when the weather was exceptionally favourable, fine and warm.

The expedition of Eckenstein, Pfannl and Guillarmod in 1902 found their greatest
obstacle in the extremely bad weather from June to August. In June only they had
a few short intervals of fair weather.

The conclusion apparently to be drawn from these data was that the best chance
would be to get upon the spot very early, quite at the beginning of June. At
that season the mountains would not be free from the winter and spring snow, but
we could at least hope for longer periods of fine weather, and in any case take
advantage of the entire summer season. This was the plan which the Duke adopted.

Time was short to make the necessary preparations for so early a start. However,
thanks to the Duke’s forethought and order, his great experience gained in
former expeditions, his careful study of local conditions and his methodical
system of work, everything was actually ready in time. The following narrative
will show how perfectly suited his equipment was to the end in view, and how
great a part this fact played in assuring our substantial comfort and health in
exceptional circumstances of surroundings and climate.

As on his former expeditions, the Duke carried out all his equipment from
Europe—camp material, personal effects and supplies for the glacier regions, as
well as to supplement the slender resources of the valleys. This system allows
of a far more careful selection of each object, greater attention in putting
them together and the avoidance of all waste of time in order to procure
necessaries along the way.

I need not go into details regarding the careful preparation of the Alpine
equipment, including personal outfit, as well as ropes, ice-axes, crampons,
nails, cobbler’s tools, etc. The expedition was well supplied with
meteorological instruments selected and corrected with great care. Among these
were the fragile Fortin mercury barometers, a perpetual source of anxiety,
causing elaborate precautions at every step. The Duke had decided to adopt
Paganini’s photogrammetrical system for the topographical work. This method had
already been used in important surveys, both in Italy and in other countries.

So a photogrammetric camera with a stock of plates was added to Sella’s
photographic materials. The expedition was even provided with a cinematograph so
as to apply the most modern method of illustration.

Medical supplies had to be brought to minister to the needs of the natives, who
seldom see a European doctor and are quite out of reach of civilized means of
treatment. On the other hand the expedition possessed only two guns, and these
were brought rather on the chance of getting some specimens of zoological
interest than with any intention of sport.

It takes at least two months to get from Europe to the Karakoram. Therefore, the
whole expedition, including guides and porters, sailed from Marseilles on March
26th by the P. and O. steamer Oceana. Such of the supplies as had been purchased
in England had already been put on board at Tilbury.

The voyage was a delightful period of rest after the several weeks of hard work
at equipment and other preparations. The Mediterranean was kind to us for the
four days of our crossing. The steamer followed a course to the west of Sicily
in order not to pass the ill-starred Straits of Messina, at that time avoided by
traffic as if the cataclysm of December still brooded like a dark menace over
the scene of devastation. Then came the lazy voyage down the Suez Canal. where
you gaze from the deck over the boundless desert stretching from either bank;
and the hot Red Sea, like a sudden summer, languid and enervating; and, last of
all, the Indian Ocean, whose blue waters were so dark as to be almost black and
perfectly calm—not a ripple to foretell the monsoon which would rage over them a
month later.

We entered Bombay Harbour at daybreak on April 9th (Good Friday). The lazy mood
of the long voyage gave way suddenly to an impatient desire to get on. A few
hours were employed in superintending the unloading of our goods, getting them
through the Customs and removing them to the station, and in making arrangements
with banks and agents. This done, we set out by railway early in the afternoon.

The journey to Rawal Pindi takes two days, crossing towards the north of the
Punjab, with a wide détour so as to leave Rajputana to the east. Notwithstanding
special contrivances to protect the carriages from the heat, we felt them to be
like furnaces. Fleeting visions were vouchsafed us of dusty districts parched by
the first breath of summer; villages of mud and rubble huts, with threshing
floors of beaten earth where hump-backed cattle were treading out the ripe
harvest, driven round and round by folk clad in white or red cotton, the men
wearing the big turban of India, and surrounded by tiny naked children  playing
m the dust. Beside the great herds and flocks scattered in the wide fields, we
would see here and there antelopes fleeing from the train, and jackals; and the
whole country is full of birds of all sorts and many colours—splendid peacocks,
crows, brilliant jays, doves, pigeons, parrots, vultures, hawks, kingfishers,
and many others impossible to distinguish from an express train in motion. The
trees give you no suggestion as to a season. One is covered with leaves, another
full of blossoms without foliage, another shows bare branches, while others
again are bursting into full leaf. Temples and shrines, old forts and runs, pass
rapidly before our eyes, especially near Gualior and Delhi, names which evoke
such memories. But of them, alas! we see but the railway stations, crowded with
natives of every conceivable tribe, wearing every conceivable sort of dress.

Now we cross the Jhelum, a wide river where many herds come to the
watering-place; and the way winds up over a succession of terraces of chalk and
clay, and far off against the clear sky to the northward we make out the outline
of the snowy mountains which bound the huge plain of India. This is the Pir
Panjal range, a branch of the Himalaya, which forms the southern barrier of the
table-land of Kashmir. Farther on this range is hidden by nearer and lower
hills, which form the Siwalik chain. Not far from this latter our railway
journey ends at Rawal Pindi, on the evening of Easter Sunday, April 11th. The
train rolls off, carrying with it Major Lockhart, of the Guides, a kind English
officer who had interpreted for us in several small difficulties, and our party
finds itself stranded on the platform beside a huge pile of cases, crates and
bales, which had filled a whole van and which contained our entire equipment.
There are 132 pieces, weighing 166 *maunds* of 80 lbs. each, giving a total of
about 13,280 lbs.

The whole of this luggage had to be got up to Srinagar by the carriage road,
which was finished some twenty years ago. This road is about 200 miles long, and
goes from Rawal Pindi (1,700 feet above sea level) along the Jhelum Valley to
the high plateau of Kashmir (5,200 feet above sea level), crossing in its course
one of the lower spurs at a height of 7,467 feet.^[^0201]^

Next morning at 6 o’clock we all met at the station, where the Duke had made an
appointment with the agents, porters and transport vehicles. Punctuality,
however, is extremely relative in the East. he agent did not get there until
half-past six. About half-an-hour later turned up the representative of
Dhanjiboy, a Parsee who has a monopoly of the postal service and of carriages,
carts and horses between Pindi and Srinagar. Presently the *ekkas* came slowly
dribbling in. Ekkas are strange vehicles. The body is in the shape of an obverse
pyramid, which stands upon an axle without any springs, between two high wheels.
The shafts diverge so that their farther ends are about two yards apart. All
ekkas appear to be centuries old, tumble-down and decayed, patched up here and
there and everywhere with bits of rotten string, so that their holding together
at all appears a miracle. And yet they usually carry some ten or eleven maunds
each (between 800 and 900 lbs.). Only three or four rather small packages can
find room in the actual body of the ekka; but on top of these are placed two
long poles, upon which is piled up a load considerably higher than the top of
the wheels, giving to the whole a most extraordinary aspect of instability. The
ekka is drawn by a single horse, and does the whole distance in about eight
days. Carts of a more familiar shape are also to be had, and are stronger and
hold a good deal more. These are drawn by oxen, and it takes them over a
fortnight to get to Srinagar.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![EKKAS.](Karakoram_019.jpg ""){#b019}
::::

It took us the whole morning under a broiling sun to count all of the luggage
and ascertain that nothing was missing, and then to proceed to its distribution
among the ekkas, surrounded the whole time by troops of coolies shouting and
arguing and quarrelling without a moment’s respite. The division of the luggage
into loads is a very long and toilsome   job, and is made about four times as
long as it need be by endless trying and trying over again. Every time you get
up a single piece of luggage on to the ekka you have it pulled down again; then
you try another in the same place, and then a third, and so on. At last, between
1 and 2 o’clock in the afternoon, the whole lot of ekkas, with their shapeless
loads tied and roped together, were driven out of the station and assembled in
the courtyard of Dhanjiboy, ready to start at night.

We now had a few hours to purchase some articles at Pindi. The town is
uninteresting—a typical cantonment with wide roads, well kept and lined with
bungalows and gardens. Nearly every afternoon a violent wind blows in hot gusts
for a few hours, raising a stifling cloud of dust and sand, which penetrates
through every crack of door or window.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF RAWAL PINDI.](Karakoram_020.jpg ""){#b020}
::::

By daybreak on the following day we left Pindi in two landaus, which were drawn
at a sharp trot by small wiry horses. On the outskirts of the town in front of
the verandahs which run along the low native houses the greater part of the
population were sound asleep in the street upon their charpoys, a sort of bed
consisting of a rectangular framework, across which is passed to and fro and
interwoven a narrow band of coarsely woven hemp, thus forming a couch which
combines the qualities of simplicity, elasticity and strength. The general
Impression given by the population asleep on these stretchers along the street
is that some epidemic is raging or that they have been driven from their homes
by an earthquake.

Our personal luggage was sent on ahead upon two-wheeled vehicles of the native
variety known as tongas. Tongas are two-horse vehicles with a curved,
dome-shaped roof, underneath which is one seat parallel to the axle. Upon this
four people can find room, two sitting in front facing the horses and two facing
backwards. As much baggage as possible is arranged under this seat, on the
mudguards and on the sides of the roof, tying it on as best may be.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![A TONGA.](Karakoram_021.jpg "A TONGA."){#b021}
::::

Sir Martin Conway observes that the tonga resembles the *carpentam* of the
ancient Romans and Gauls, as shown on a bas-relief at Tréves. In spite of their
primitive appearance, tongas are in many ways better suited to the mountain
roads than the heavy carriages Dhanjiboy provided for us.

The ancient road to Kashmir, which was followed for centuries by the Mogol
emperors and their retinues, of whose pomp and splendour such a living picture
has been handed down to us by Bernier^[^0202]^, the French physician at the Court of
Aurengzebe, ran to the east of the modern route, direct to Kashmir from the
plain of Jammm, across a pass of the Pir Panjal range. The new road, which was
opened in 1890, reaches the Jhelum valley just above the narrow gorge through
which the latter descends from the plain of Kashmir, and crosses the spur of
mountains which form the western barrier of this gorge. Near the top of the pass
(7,467 feet high) stands Murree, a hill station which is crowded in summer, but
was quite peaceful and empty when we passed through. We reached Murree in the
pouring rain and shivering with cold, owing to the sudden transition from the
hot suffocating air of the plain to the high mountain breezes. The whole of the
descent into the Jhelum valley crosses bands of forest, where the pale green of
the budding deciduous trees contrasts with the dark conifers and with the lively
colouring of the flowering bushes. We proceeded rapidly at a quick trot or
gallop even at the steepest points, thanks to the relays of horses which awaited
us every four or six miles, according to the steepness of the road. Little time
was lost in changing them, because the system of harness is extremely simple.
There are no buckles, no straps and no traces. There is only a bar which crosses
the pole and fits into two uprights fixed into the saddles of the harness.

:::: { .wrap-50 .float-left }
![THE ROAD TO KASHMIR.](Karakoram_022.jpg "THE ROAD TO KASHMIR."){#b022}
::::

The ragged and dirty postilion sits beside the driver and with the harsh and
strident notes of his horn clears the way of the carts, ekkas and tongas which
we keep meeting and passing.

The weather had cleared by the time we reached Kohala, our first stage, at the
bottom of the valley, at a distance of a little over 64 miles. Kohala stands
about 300 feet above Pindi, and is a village of a few houses, which rise on
terraces one above another on the steep night bank of the Jhelum at the inlet of
the narrow gorge through which the river forces its way out from the mountains.
The water rushes fiercely at the bottom of the gorge, whirling on its muddy and
foaming waves the numberless tree trunks which are sent down from the mountains
to Jhelum, the city of the Punjab plain, which has given its name to the river.

But in the mountains which shelter its hallowed sources and throughout Kashmir
the name of the river is Vehnt, a corruption of the Sanserit Vitasta, “one who
hastens,” from which may also be derived the Hydaspes of the Greek historians.
This river formed the eastern limit of the conquests of Alexander, and according
to legend the Macedonian navigated its downward course to the Indus.

At Kohala we made our first acquaintance with the dak bungalows or guest-houses
which are found at every stage on the main roads and on many of the principal
bridle paths. They are all built on the same plan, and consist of a ground floor
only, with a wide verandah on to which all the bedrooms open. Behind each
bedroom there is usually a small bathroom. The furniture is simple but clean. On
the high road from Pindi to Kashmir the dak bungalows are real inns, provided
with a cook and with supplies and servants, so that travellers need not bring a
large amount of luggage. Little equipment is needed beyond the sleeping-bag or
the valise which holds a thin mattress, pillow, blanket and sheets, all of which
are equally indispensable for railway travelling in India. The bedrooms contain
charpoys, upon which vou spread vour own bedding.

Immediately outside of Kohala the road crosses the Jhelum upon the bridge which
marks the boundary between British territory and the Protectorate of Jammu and
Kashmir. Here an official dignitary met us to bid the Duke of the Abruzzi
welcome in the name of the Maharajah. The road now follows the left slope of the
valley at a height of from 600 to 1,000 feet above the river. Upon either side
of the valley are traces of alluvial terraces rising one above another to a
great height and indicating successive upheavals of the whole mass, while the
river kept on its way at its original level by progressive erosion of its bed.^[^0203]^

Some 20 miles above Kohala two large tributary valleys, that of Kunhar or Naim
Suk and that of Kishen Ganga, open out on the right bank of the Jhelum, divided
one from another by a range of hills capped with snow peaks. At this point,
before the high road was built, another path came into the Jhelum valley from
Abbottabad in the Punjab. At its point of confluence with the Kishen Ganga the
Jhelum valley suddenly changes its course, doubling back at a sharp angle round
the end of the spur of hills on its left side and rising south-eastward with an
increasing deflection towards the east. The valley of the Kishen Ganga goes on
in the direction in which we had hitherto followed up the Jhelum, towards the
north, so that at this junction you feel as if the road had left the main valley
to follow up an affluent. As a matter of fact Oestreich questions whether it
would not be more correct to regard the Jhelum as a tributary of the Kishen
Ganga rather than the latter as a tributary of the former, notwithstanding that
the Jhelum has the greater volume of water and a longer course above the point
of junction. The Kishen Ganga is also a very considerable river, and in its long
course flows round the whole northern boundary of Kashmir. We were to meet this
river again in its upper valley on our way back to Srinagar from the Baltoro.

Not far from this remarkable bend of the river stands Domel, the Kashmiri
custom-house. It consists of a dirty little bazar which purveys to the needs of
a crowd of drivers and carters, who busy themselves with deafening shouts among
the oxen and horses which stray loose among the vehicles of every possible type
laden with goods liable to custom. Sir Francis Younghusband, the British
Resident in Kashmir, had obtained from the Maharajah a free pass for the Duke's
equipment, which saved us trouble and delay.

From now on the valley lies between the Kaj Nag to the north and a spur of the
Pir Panjal to the south, and the scenery is completely changed. The features due
to erosion are less marked, whereas there is a great increase in the alluvial
deposits, which often reach a thickness of a few hundred feet and form a series
of terraces at the bottom of the valley, which lie with such regularity on
either side of the deep channel which the river has cut in the sedimentary mass
as to suggest the hypothesis of a lacustrian origin.^[^0204]^

The level surfaces of the terraces are carefully irrigated and covered with
crops, especially rice plantations, made in narrow terraces rising one above
another, each with a raised margin to regulate the flow of water from the top to
the bottom.

Where the lie of the land does not lend itself to rice plantations there are
fields of corn and orehards in full blossom. The whole countryside is alive with
the song of all sorts of birds. The cultivated land reaches up the slopes to the
edge of the pine woods and pasture land. Above these, again, are rocks sprinkled
with snow and cut by couloirs full of nevés.

As far as possible the road runs over the flat alluvial terraces; but at many
points it has been necessary to cut it out along the precipitous cliffs beneath
steep slopes of shingle and detritus of all sizes in perpetual course of
disaggregation. Every now and then we come upon the debris of former or recent
landslides, and meet squads of coolies busily engaged in clearing the road from
the fallen earth and stones. During the rainy season it is a hazardous journey,
and the road may he cut for days together.

The day’s journey was of 69 miles, and we halted for the night at Uri, 4,420
feet above the sea level, where the valley widens out. At this point the scenery
is very beautiful. The valley is dotted with ruins of ancient temples, and there
are the remains of a fortified city opposite the cliffs of Kaj Nag, which is
still crowned with snow. The level is formed by fluvial-glacial deposits, and
near at hand are some big granite boulders, whose origin has been a source of
much controversy among geologists. The absence of glacier marks in the valley
below and above Uri makes it difficult to explain how these boulders came there,
and whence the origin of the moraine remnants which are found at this point. Of
all the different hypotheses the most probable, perhaps, is that of Godwin
Austen, which has been further amplified by Oestreich^[^0205]^—namely, that of glaciers
from the lateral valleys which may at one time have overflowed into the main
valley, leaving the traces in question.

Immediately above the plain of Uri the valley narrows again into the famous
gorge of Basmagul, one of the grandest in the world, some 20 miles long and
running between walls more than 7,000 feet high. The river rages with fierce
anger against the rocky sides of its narrow bed. The slopes above are covered
with forests famed from of old for their majestic deodars. Now and again we
still found the remains of a spring avalanche of snow along the margin of the
road. Next we  pass the hydraulic station of electric power, a characteristic
symptom of European invasion. Soon we reach Baramula, the real gate of the high
valley plain of Kashmir. The torrent which thundered through the canon of
Basmagul is now transformed into a wide imposing stream, which flows slowly and
noiselessly between low and level banks along which are moored endless lines of
oats and barges.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BUNGALOW AT BARAMULA.](Karakoram_026.jpg "THE BUNGALOW AT BARAMULA."){#b026}
::::

Many travellers and the greater part of the freight proceed by water from
Baramula to Srinagar, taking two days to navigate up the Jhelum and cross the
Wular lake, into which it widens above. This traffic has given rise to the
typical little Kashmiri town of Baramula, with houses of sun-baked brick,
windows and doors of wood, often well carved, and narrow lanes crowded with
handsome, duty people, and with women who are not so quick to cover their faces
at the sight of the stranger but that he can get a glimpse of regular features
and fine eyes. The distance by road to Srinagar is about 34 miles, a few hours
by carriage. The road which cuts across the plain is quite straight, and runs
between two regular lines of tall poplars, set close to one another, as on
certain French roads. On either side are little lakes and swamps and rice
plantations, where the peasants are busy turning over the mud in the flooded
fields with primitive ploughs drawn by oxen. Behind the rows of poplars around
the scattered farms are to be seen a great variety of fruit trees in flower and
gigantic *chenars* standing alone or in  clumps. The chenar^[^0206]^, or Oriental plane,
which was brought into the country by the Mogol emperors, is a splendid tree
which reaches an immense size, with a wonderfully graceful growth of branches
and with dense foliage giving a deep, cool shade.

On either side extends the great green plain of Kashmir, circled round on every
side and appearing absolutely shut in by a continuous girdle of mountains, at
this season all still covered with snow. The valley stands at a mean height of a
little over 5,000 feet, and is oval, with its greatest axis running north-west
to south-east, about 90 miles long and from 20 to 25 miles wide, enclosed by the
Pir Panjal range to the south, whose peaks rise over 15,500 feet; and by the
Himalaya proper to the north, ending in the lofty summit of Nanga Parbat (26,620
feet), whose peaks are visible from many points in Kashmir, although they do not
directly command the valley.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![POPLAR AVENUE BETWEEN BARAMUL AND SRINAGAR.](Karakoram_027.jpg "POPLAR AVENUE BETWEEN BARAMUL AND SRINAGAR."){#b027}
::::

The sight of this vast basin enclosed by high mountain walls infallibly suggests
the notion that it has been the bed of a lake. No wonder that nearly all those
who have travelled there in the past sought for and thought to have found clear
tokens of a lake which at some recent geological period presumably filled the
valley to a considerable height above the present level of the plain, where all
that remains of these supposed mighty waters are the three small lakes Wular,
Dal and Manasbal. According to this hypothesis, the great alluvial deposits
which form the characteristic terraces called karewa, usually situated on the
verge of the valley at the foot of the ranges and rising about 200 to 300 feet
above the plain, would be mere lacustrian deposits. In the middle of the valley
they would have been gradually worn down and swept away by the river current
which was formed when the lake broke an outlet through the mountains at
Baramula. How this lake came to be and how it came to be emptied has given rise
to numerous hypotheses, of which Oestreich has given a clear summary.

There is no doubt that the legends interwoven with mythology which are still
current in Kashmir, and which are given in a Sanscrit work by Kalhana, the
Kashmiri historian of the twelfth century, translated by Stein, appear to
corroborate at every point the geological hypothesis of a former submersion of
the valley. From Bernier onwards all those who have written on Kashmir—Thomson,
Vigne, the brothers Schlagintweit, Montgomerie, Godwin Austen, Purdon, Lydekker,
Knight, etc.^[^0207]^—were unhesitatingly of the opinion that this was the true
explanation. It is plain, however, that the supposed lake must have had its
existence and emptied itself at a geological epoch far earlier than the first
appearance of man on the earth. The legend therefore can by no means be
connected with direct human observation, and loses all value as a proof. Drew
and Stein are thus forced to the conclusion that the earliest inhabitants of
Kashmir were competent to read and interpret the geological records of the
valley.^[^0208]^

Marchese Roero di Cortanze, a Piedmontese who lived in Kashmir from 1853 to
1875, and who travelled in Ladakh and Baltistan, even crossing the Karakoram
into Turkestan, has given us in three interesting little volumes his views upon
the country. The book is now rare and difficult to get.^[^0209]^ He is the only one of
the early writers who shows a cautious reserve as to the authority of the
legend, suggesting, not unreasonably, that it might owe its origin to some
exceptionally heavy spring flood. The latter have frequently proved a fearful
disaster to the whole region. Beside the melting of snows, they might have been
provoked by some obstacle to the free flow of the river. Kalhana’s old history,
which we have just quoted, relates that in the second half of the eleventh
century an obstruction of the gorge below Baramula caused a partial inundation
of the valley. It would seem that this obstacle was removed by contriving to
collect the waters of the river behind a temporary dam constructed for the
purpose, and then opening it and letting them rush through, a truly colossal
work for that period.

Modern geologists are inclined to give up the lake hypothesis altogether.
Ellsworth Huntington is of opinion that the sedimentary deposits were the work
of rivers and torrents in the basin during its formation, while the Jhelum was
gradually eating away the outlet of Baramula, so that there would never have een
occasion for a great accumulation of waters.^[^0210]^ Oestreich has an intermediary
hypothesis which does not altogether exclude the possibility of the temporary
existence of a lake, but he is of opinion that the present lakes are even now in
process of formation, and by no means remnants of a greater ancient lake^[^0211]^;
while R. D. Oldham, from studies carried out in 1903, came to the conclusion
that the deposits are of fluvial and not of lacustrian origin, and that there is
no proof that there ever were any lakes larger than those actually existing.^[^0212]^

Whatever may have been the geological past of Kashmir, its present state is one
of such beauty as to kindle the imagination of all who have attempted to
describe it. From the earliest traveller to the latest book of Sir Francis
Younghusband^[^0213]^ there is a unanimous chorus of enthusiasm and admiration. To our
party, who had left Italy barely twenty days before, the first impression was one
of slight disappointment. The long high road, the lines of poplars across the
great uniform plain with the rice plantations, the familiar European trees and
the far-off snowy ranges slightly veiled in the soft mist of the atmosphere,
combined to produce a scene so like our own Lombard plain in its beauty, that we
felt baulked of the East of our dreams which we had come so far to seek. But to
travellers who come to Kashmir after months or years spent in the parched and
burning plains of India, or after wearying journeys across the barren waste of
Central Asia, it must seem a paradise indeed.

About half way between Baramula and Srinagar our carriages began to emit
squeaking and groaning sounds to such a degree as to cause grave anxiety, as
they appeared to be on the point of going to pieces altogether. The spokes of
the wheels looked as if they were coming off, the connection between springs and
body went wrong, and to the European mind it really looked as if it would be
scarcely possible to proceed. But the drivers, by means of cunning knots,
contrived to remedy the more serious disasters, and we were able to pursue our
way, though at a diminished pace. The primitive tonga is decidedly preferable to
the European carriage for this journey. It is very probable that in a few years
both will be superseded by the motor-car, not to speak of the possibility of a
railway, which has long been projected and which would at once destroy the
pleasant remoteness of this beautiful valley.

Nine miles from Srinagar the Duke was met by a carriage sent from the Residency.
Soon we reached the suburbs of Srinagar, surrounded by wide fields which were
thronged with people. We crossed the Jhelum on a wide wooden bridge to the right
bank, where lies the European quarter. Around the great grassy *maidan*,
surrounded by roads shaded with poplars, stand the Residency, the bungalows of
the officials and others, the post-office, the agencies and the hotel. The Duke
and Negrotto were hospitably entertained by Sir Francis and Lady Younghusband.
We have now reached the limits of civilized means of communication.

Botta and one of the guides had travelled with us. The other six, who left Pindi
the day after us, were to arrive the next day. The limited number of horses at
the stages makes it impossible for a great number of carriages to proceed
simultaneously.

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0200]: [*Courmayeur*: refer [Courmayeur](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Courmayeur)]{.footnote}

[^0201]: [See map with the itinerary of the expedition.]{.footnote}

[^0202]: [FRANCOIS BERNIER, *Travels in the Mogul Empire* (A.D. 1656-1668). London. A. Constable, 1891.]{.footnote}

[^0203]: [K. OESTREICH, *Die Täler des nordwestlichen Himalaya. Petermann’s Mitt., Ergänzungsheft* 155, 1906. An interesting geological monograph, the fruit of observations made by the author while accompanying the Workman expedition of 1902.]{.footnote}

[^0204]: [LIEUT.-COL GODWIN AUSTEN, *Geological Notes on Part of the North-Western Himalaya Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc.* xx; and SIR MARTIN CONWAY, op. cit.]{.footnote}

[^0205]: [GODWIN AUSTEN, OESTREICH, opp. citt.]{.footnote}

[^0206]: [*chenar*: refer [Platanus orientalis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platanus_orientalis)]{.footnote}

[^0207]: [W. H. PURPON, *On the Trigonometrical Survey and Physical Configuration of the Valley of Kashmir. Jour. Roy. Geog. Soc.* 31, 1861, p. 14; LYDEKKER, *The Geology of Kashmir and Chamba Territories. Mem. of the Geol. Surv. of India,* 22, 1883, p. 186; E. F. KNIGHT, *Where Three Empires Meet.* London 1905. The other authors as already cited.]{.footnote}

[^0208]: [F. DREW, *The Jummoo and Kashmir Territories.* London, ed. 1875 and 1877; M. A. STEIN, *Memoir and Maps Illustrating the Ancient Geography of Kashmir.* Calcutta 1899.]{.footnote}

[^0209]: [OSWALDO ROERO DEI MARCHESI DI CORTANZE , *Cashemir, Piccolo e Medio Thibet e Turkestan.* Turin, 1881. 3 vols.]{.footnote}

[^0210]: [E. HUNTINGTON, *The Vale of Kashmir. Bull. Amer. Geog. Soc.,* 38, 1906, p. 657.]{.footnote}

[^0211]: [Vigne, Stein and Huntington have, however, found certain indications that the Wular lake was at one time larger than it is now. The village of Bandipur, which formerly stood on the shore of the lake, is now nearly a mile away from it.]{.footnote}

[^0212]: [R. D. OLDHAM, *Note on the Glaciation and History of the Sind Yalley, Kashmir. Records Geolog. Surv. of India,* 31, 1904, p. 142.]{.footnote}

[^0213]: [SIR F. E. YOUNGHUSBAND *Kashmir.* London 1909.]{.footnote}
