# CHAPTER III.<br /> KASHMIR. {#three .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Antiquity of the History of Kashmir.— The Sanscrit Chronicle of its Kings. — The First
Mohammedan Conquest. — The Mogol Emperors. — Afghans and Sikhs. — The Inhabitants
— Srinagar. — Life on the Jhelum. — The Hanji Caste. — The City. — The Mogol Gardens.
—The European Quarter. — Takt-i-Suliman and Hari Parbat.—The Dal. — Lake
Vegetation. — The Kashmiri Spring. — Itinerary of the Expedition. — Departure from
Srinagar. — The Marshes of Anchar.— Mount Haramuk.—The First Discovery and
Mensuration of K^2^. — The River Sind. — The State Camp at Gunderbal.
<br /><br />
::::

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_031.jpg ""){#b031}
::::

SRINAGAR is now the summer residence of His Highness the Maharajah of Jammu _
and Kashmir, one of the great Protectorates of the British Empire. The States of
the Maharajah include Buddhist Ladakh, which by race, customs and religion,
geographical situation and orohydrographic features, is really a portion of
Tibet; Baltistan. whose inhabitants are Shiite Mohammedans; and the minor
districts of Astor-Gilgit, Hunza-Nagar, etc.—in a word, the whole of the
territory lying between Afghanistan, Chinese Turkestan and Tibet proper. The
population of Kashmir is Sunnite Mohammedan, whereas Jammu (a vast plain
district bordering the Punjab) is entirely Hindu.

The whole kingdom, formed of elements so diverse, was but recently united under
the domination of Hindu rulers of the Dogra Rajput race. Kashmir had been for
some twenty years subject to the Sikhs of the Punjab when Gulab Singh was sent
thither in 1841 to put down a rising.

In the course of the following fifteen years his army, little by little,
conquered Ladakh and Baltistan. Meantime the Punjab had been conquered by the
British, between 1845 and 1856, and the Imperial Government recognized the
sovereignty over Jammu and Kashmir of Gulab Singh, upon whom they conferred the
title of Maharajah, and who became the founder of the present dynasty. It would
seem as if the peculiar position of Kashmir, surrounded as it is by mountains
which are difficult to cross, and passes which before the construction of the
carriage road were quite closed by snow for several months every year, ought to
have sheltered it from outside influences and put it in a position to follow the
lines of its own development undisturbed, favoured by its temperate climate and
the marvellous fertility of its soil. This happy isolation, however, only lasted
till the twelfth century. Putting aside the many notices of Kashmir which have
come down to us from the remotest antiquity, from Herodotus to Marco Polo, we
have the story of the country throughout its autonomous Hindu period in an
ancient Sanscrit chronicle, the work of several authors, which was put together
about the middle of the thirteenth century. This work gives us minute
information concerning the great prosperity of the country, the high level of
its civilization, the development of its arts and the splendour of its temples.

The first Mohammedan conquest took place in 1341, and thenceforward the country
never threw off the yoke of foreign domination. The independent Mohammedan kings
were followed by Mogol emperors, under whom it became an integral part of the
empire of Delhi, and was adorned with sumptuous palaces and gardens. Next came
the Afghan conquest, and not until 1819 was Kashmir once more governed by
Hindus—the Sikhs of the Punjab. During the five centuries of Mohammedan
domination the old Hindu faith had been almost entirely superseded by Islam.

The Kashmiris of to-day appear to differ little from the Kashmiris of thirteen
centuries ago, when the Chinese pilgrim Hwen Tsiang described them as “light and
frivolous, and of a weak, pusillanimous disposition, handsome in appearance,
given to cunning, fond of learning and well instructed ”’ (Stein).

It is nevertheless indubitable that the long foreign domination has contributed
to the formation of their character, which is judged by universal consent to be
lacking in manly qualities and inclined to deceit.

They give proof, however, of alert intelligence, of marked artistic talents, and
of considerable ingeniousness and dexterity in the various handicrafts for which
they are distinguished throughout India.

They are a handsome people and well built, with regular features; and the
foreigner would be more inclined to admire them if he were not unremittingly
persecuted by the insistent importunity of their offers of service or of wares,
which reaches such a point that frequently only the threat of personal
chastisement avails to get rid of them.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SRINAGAR FROM THE SLOPE OF HARI PARBAT.](Karakoram_033.jpg "SRINAGAR FROM THE SLOPE OF HARI PARBAT."){#b033}
::::

Kashmir seems to be now at last freed from the secular oppression of her
invaders, to which was added the calamity of earthquakes, which time after time
decimated her population and laid low their habitations, not to speak of the
floods, epidemics and famines with which her history abounds in the past as well
as in recent times. The general appearance of the population is now fairly
prosperous. The people look healthy and well fed, with fine chubby children; nor
did we often see persons who were diseased or crippled or rachitic, or any other
signs of  During the long period of Mohammedan domination the capital city was
known as Kashmir, but when it fell into the power of the Sikhs it resumed its
ancient Hindu name of Srinagar.^[^0300]^ It has a population of about 130,000, and
stands almost in the centre of the plain at a height of 5,303 feet, upon the
banks of the Jhelum, which flows through it in a sweeping curve. The river is
the main thoroughfare of the city, and is always crowded with boats of various
sorts. The light, swift *shzkara*, the *dunga*, a big flat-bottomed boat with a
shelter amidships roofed over with matting; the heavy barges loaded with wood,
gram, oil or vegetables—all come and go continually up and down the river or lie
tied along the banks. The boatmen form a large population, and with their women
and children pass their whole life on the water. They belong to a special caste
known as Hanji. They are well built and handsome, but are looked down upon, not
without good reason, by both Mohammedans and Hindus.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SRINAGAR FROM TAKT-I-SULIMAN. THE EUROPEAN QUARTER.](Karakoram_034.jpg "SRINAGAR FROM TAKT-I-SULIMAN. THE EUROPEAN QUARTER."){#b034}
::::

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Srinagar.](Karakoram_034a.jpg "Srinagar."){#b034a}
::::

The principal houses of Srinagar stand along the river. The Maharajah’s palace
is quite modern. The few old palaces which are still standing are in the hands
of wealthy merchants. Over a solid basement wall, built like a bastion to
withstand the freshets of the river, rises a facade adorned with several tiers
of wooden balconies one above another, elaborately carved with effective and
ancient designs. Alongside of these similar great foundations of stone blocks,
which must have supported other palaces in the past, now serve to sustain
wretched tumble-down hovels. The whole river bank to the water's edge is taker
up with houses, except where at intervals long flights of steps give access to
the river. Here crowds of men. women and children come and go incessantly, wash
their clothes, their persons and their pots and pans, or sit chatting in rows to
enjoy the cool of the evening. The two banks are joined by seven bridges resting
upon piers solidly built out of the interlocked trunks of trees, with the
interstices filled up with stones. Numerous canals branch off from the river,
and intersect the city in every direction, giving rise to the title of “Venice
of the East,” but I must say that the comparison is due rather to a lively
imagination than to any actual resemblance between the two cities.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE NATIVE CITY, FROM TAKT-I-SULIMAN.](Karakoram_035.jpg "THE NATIVE CITY, FROM TAKT-I-SULIMAN."){#b035}
::::

The narrow streets on the land are, as is usual in the East, mainly bazars, and
are crowded with natives clothed in the native woollen home-spun, usually brown
or dirty white in colour, and known as *puttoo.* You meet few women, and those
few evidently belong to the lower castes. The city is full of temples and
mosques, but of these only two or three offer any antiquarian or artistic
interest. Little trace remains of the ancient civilization described in the old
chronicles. This may be due to earthquakes, which have several times laid
Srinagar low, to the iconoclastic rage of the Mohammedan conquerors or to
Eastern carelessness, made up of fatalism, sloth and indifference to the past.
The few monuments of which any trace exists in the neighbourhood of Srinagar are
remains of Buddhist temples. Next to these the most interesting buildings are
without doubt the sumptuous country houses of the Mogol emperors. Here the
splendid old gardens, with their artificial cascades, their great tanks and
elaborate fountains, their splendid alleys of huge chenars, the design, still
recognizable, of their formal plan, and the architectural detail of their
little pleasure-houses, although not to be compared with the marvels of Delhi
and Agra,  nevertheless bear witness to the luxury, taste and refinement which.
the world of Islam brought with it to the scene of its conquests, from Spain to
India. Defeated and thrust back from the west by the victorious cross, after
conquering nearly one-half of the world, it was here that Islam displayed its
last splendours.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![STREET IN SRINAGAR.](Karakoram_036.jpg "STREET IN SRINAGAR."){#b036}
::::

One of the most characteristic features of Srinagar are the roofs of the houses
and even of the temples. which are covered with earth and planted with grass and
flowers. In spring they are gay with blue iris and scarlet tulips, around which
hover butterflies and birds. The latter pervade and haunt every nook of the
city, streets, verandahs. shops in the bazar and temples with their joyous
notes. their twittering and their chirping, and seem to live on excellent terms
with the whole population.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![AT SRINAGAR.](Karakoram_037.jpg "AT SRINAGAR."){#b037}
::::

The European quarter consists of a few dozen bungalows in addition to the
Residency. It stands upstream from the native town and is built chiefly round a
great open space like a huge village green. It is enclosed on one side by the
river and on the other by the wide canal which comes into the river from the
Wular lake; and it is protected from floods by high dykes. along which run roads
lined with magnificent ancient chenar trees. On the lower portion of this bank,
known as the Bund, next to the native town, stand the rows of European shops
kept by Parsees or Eurasians. We must not pass over the mission hospital, which
was founded and is kept up by the two Doctors Neve, who have done well-known and
excellent exploring and Alpine expeditions in the surrounding ranges during the
brief holidays permitted by their arduous missionary labours.

The crowds of European visitors who seek out Kashmir in the spring and summer
live mostly in house-boats of from four to six rooms, built upon flat-bottomed
barges. These are tied up at the pleasantest spots along the banks of the Jhelum
or on the canals or lakes. After the middle of June the European colony, both
residents and tourists, move up into the hills, either to Gulmarg, where there
is a hotel and bungalows, or to the higher valleys, where they camp out under
canvas.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![HOUSE AND INDIAN TEMPLE ON THE CANAL.](Karakoram_038.jpg "HOUSE AND INDIAN TEMPLE ON THE CANAL."){#b038}
::::

Eastward and northward of the town of Srinagar rise two hills, which play a
great part in the beauty of the scenery. The one to the east terminates the spur
which runs out from the ranges to the northeast into the plain, and rises to a
height of about 1.000 feet just above the European quarter. Upon the top of this
hill stands an ancient  temple known as the Takt-i-Suliman, one of the numerous
“thrones of Solomon,” a name often given by Mohammedans to any striking isolated
peak in the countries subject to their laws and traditions. According to
Fergusson, this temple is of relatively recent date, but built upon a much older
foundation. The Takt-i-Suliman is a favourite walk or ride of about an hour, and
offers a marvellous view of the plain and of the lakes and hills which surround
it.

The other of the two hills is an isolated and precipitous rock to the north of
the city, known as Hari Parbat, on top of which stands an ancient fort now used
as a prison.

The expedition remained in Srinagar seven days, from April 16th to April 23rd,
partly to wait for the heavy luggage which was slowly toiling up the road we had
travelled so quickly, and partly to complete our equipment at all points. The
chief job which we had to do in Srinagar was to get a certain number of *kiltas*
made. These are strong light panniers made of wickerwork, either rectangular or
barrel-shaped,temple known as the Takt-i-Suliman, one of the numerous “thrones
of Solomon,” a name often given by Mohammedans to any striking isolated peak in
the countries subject to their laws and traditions. According to Fergusson, this
temple is of relatively recent date, but built upon a much older foundation.^[^0301]^ The
Takt-i-Suliman is a favourite walk or ride of about an hour, and offers a
marvellous view of the plain and of the lakes and hills which surround it.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BRIDGE AND HOUSE-BOAT ON THE JHELUM.](Karakoram_039.jpg "BRIDGE AND HOUSE-BOAT ON THE JHELUM."){#b039}
::::

The other of the two hills is an isolated and precipitous rock to the north of
the city, known as Hari Parbat, on top of which stands an ancient fort now used
as a prison.

The expedition remained in Srinagar seven days, from April 16th to April 23rd,
partly to wait for the heavy luggage which was slowly toiling up the road we had
travelled so quickly, and partly to complete our equipment at all points. The
chief job which we had to do in Srinagar was to get a certain number of *kiltas*
made. These are strong light panniers made of wickerwork, either rectangular or
barrel-shaped and are covered with rough sheepskin, the lid being fastened with
chains and a padlock. The more fragile portions of the equipment, when not
otherwise protected, were to be put into these kiltas.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![UNDER THE CHENAR TREES.](Karakoram_040.jpg "UNDER THE CHENAR TREES."){#b040}
::::

Arrangements for our journey had already been made by the courtesy of the
Resident. upon suggestions communicated by the Duke from Europe. Sir Francis
Younghusband had entrusted Mr. A. C. Baines with the organization of the
caravan, the recruiting of horses and coolies, and the making of deposits of
stores at certain points on our march.

Mr. Baines had left Srinagar a couple of weeks before our arrival, and was
waiting for us in the Dras Valley. In this way we had leisure to enjoy the kind
hospitality of Sir Francis and Lady Younghusband and the other courteous English
officials. and to do a little sight-seeing in the city and neighbourhood. Little
by little the strong local colour of the place took possession of our minds, and
dispelled the first fleeting impression of vague disappointment. Every stroke of
the oar on the river or in the canals revealed fresh details of native life,
wonderful groups and charming scenes of Oriental manners and customs.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![CANAL AT SRINAGAR.](Karakoram_041.jpg "CANAL AT SRINAGAR."){#b041}
::::

By far the most fascinating point in the surroundings of Srinagar is the Dal
lake, a beautiful sheet of water lying at the feet of the encircling  hills
which form the spur terminating in Takt-i-Suliman. This lake is joined to the
Jhelum by an artificial canal, which is provided with locks ingeniously
constructed so as to prevent automatically the river Inundations from flowing
back into the lake. Upon the shores of the Dal lie the pleasant old Mogol
gardens, all blossoming with lilacs and roses, and full of the buds of iris,
lilies and narcissus. Under the lofty chenar trees groups of natives stroll in
the shade or sit in groups with their children, who seem as serious and solemn
as their elders.

:::: { .wrap-50 .float-left }
![A LONELY CANAL.](Karakoram_042.jpg "A LONELY CANAL."){#b042}
::::

An afternoon on the Dal lake leaves the memory of one of the fairest scenes of
nature which we have been privileged to behold. The shikara boat flies swiftly
before the strokes of a dozen oarsmen, who use short paddles with a wide flat
blade shaped hike a heart. They chant as they row, following the rhythm with the
stroke of their oars; and now and again the head boatman, who gives the time,
changes the measure abruptly from quick to slow or from slow to quick, so as to
rest the rowers by a change of motion. The strange vegetation of the lake bottom
shows like a miniature forest gently swaying in the currents of the limpid,
bluish-green water. It seems like navigating in a canal, because, with the
exception of the ways channeled out by the current, the whole surface of the
lake is clothed with a uniform mantle of vegetation, through which the water is
hardly visible. There are wide fields of soft green lotos leaves, above which
will rise later on the exquisite milky-white blossoms with their
delicately-shaded pink tips. Between the lotos float the huge round flat leaves
of the *Annesleya horrida*, whose level surface of velvety green gives no
warning of the cruel hooked spines which clothe the under side of the leaf and
stem. The long filaments of the Singara, or edible waterchestnut, twist and
tangle round innumerable other varieties of aquatic vegetation. Many parts of
the lake are dotted with floating gardens, like islands. These have been often
described. They consist of tangled masses of water plants, detached from the
lake bottom and floating freely. Upon the surface thus obtained mud is spread,
upon which grow beans, pumpkins, water-melons, melons, cucumbers, and in fact
every species of vegetable, in great abundance.

Here you meet great barges full of natives seated in a circle round the
narghile, poled slowly along by a bargeman squatting on the stern. Again,
towards evening slender barks glide upon the water, where a fisherman standing
in the bows gazes intently into the water ahead, armed with a trident which he
is ready to hurl down at sight of a trout. The shores are white with blossoming
orchards of peach, cherry, apple, pear and plum; and the mulberries, poplars and
willows are festooned with luxuriant vines. Here we have every European variety
of fruit-tree, with the exception of those which are strictly confined to the
Mediterranean region—the orange, lemon, fig and olive. Flocks and herds with
their lambs and calves graze in the pleasant shade, and the air is alive with
the song of the lively bulbuls, dear to the Persian poets, with the cooing of
doves, the strident notes of the *mina* bird and the crow, and the pleasant call
of the hoopoe. It was still too early for the   migratory birds from the plain,
the orioles, the kingfishers and herons, and the great flights of ducks and
geese.

Nearly every afternoon the sky clouds over and becomes threatening. Here the
winds blowing hot from the Indian plain meet the cold mountain barrier, and
hence frequent storms. In the sky, the air and the mountains follow in rapid
succession an infinite variety of colours with a wonderful play of light and
shade. azure rents opening on every side in the livid indigo of the storm-cloud.
As a rule, the sky clears up after a couple of hours, sometimes with a shower of
rain, sometimes without. Then follow marvellous evenings, and the far-off snows
are kindled by the flaming sunset.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BANKS OF THE DAL.](Karakoram_043.jpg "THE BANKS OF THE DAL."){#b043}
::::

Lack of space forbids my dwelling longer upon the beauties of the vale of
Kashmir. The reader who may wish to know more of this garden of the Himalaya
will perhaps find a more spontaneous, lively and picturesque account of the
region, as well as greater observation and detail, in the books of the ancient
traveller than in those of our own  day. Kashmir has not so changed in the last
fifty to seventy years as no longer to resemble the descriptions of its earlier
visitors.^[^0302]^

On the morning of April 22nd the long line of ekkas loaded with luggage entered
the garden of the Residency. We worked all day long with the Duke at going over
and rearranging the whole equipment. It was loaded on to six dunga boats the
same evening, and left Srinagar to cross the plain by river and canal to the
foot of the mountains.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![ON THE DAL.](Karakoram_044.jpg "ON THE DAL."){#b044}
::::

The itinerary of the expedition from Srinagar to the Karakoram may be indicated
in a few words.^[^0303]^ As I have already pointed out, the mountains which enclose
Kashmir to the north form part of the main range of the Himalaya proper, running
from south-east to northwest as far as Astor, where they terminate with Nanga
Parbat. This range divides Kashmir from the Indus valley, beyond which lies the
Karakoram range.^[^0304]^ Therefore, in order to reach the latter from Srinagar the
Himalaya must first be crossed. The lowest pass in the whole of this end of the
chain is the Zoji La^[^0305]^ (11,230 feet), at the head of the Sind valley, north-east
of Srinagar. Beyond the pass the Dras valley leads down to the Indus. Next the
Indus valley is followed northward as far as Skardu. the capital of Baltistan.
From Skardu the route crosses the Indus and penetrates directly into the
Karakoram. This is the main route, which is open all the year round, with the
exception of occasional short interruptions.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SUNSET ON THE DAL.](Karakoram_045.jpg "SUNSET ON THE DAL."){#b045}
::::

Another route, about 50 miles shorter, crosses the Rajdiangan Pass directly
north of Srinagar. and by the valley of the Kishen Ganga reaches the vast
table-land of the Deosai, which is more than 30 miles wide, with a mean altitude
of about 14,000 feet. Hence the route descends directly to Skardu. The Deosai
plains, however, are not practicable until after the middle of July. In April we
should have found them covered with deep snow and subject to dangerous storms,
and with our large caravan and equipment it was an attempt not to be thought of.
Even the Zoji La is not quite without danger for a large party encumbered with
heavy luggage.^[^0306]^

On April 23rd, in the early afternoon, we started from Srinagar with Sir Francis
and Lady Younghusband, who accompanied the Duke to the first stage. We took our
places in two splendid state shikaras, each with a crew of fifteen rowers
dressed in tunics and turbans of flaming red and commanded by the Jemadar Sedik,
a dry, little old man, tightly clothed in a gorgeous uniform covered with gold
braid, the “admiral” of the Maharajah’s fleet.

We went almost directly north, first through a narrow canal, little better than
a ditch, between the houses of a series of villages. Out of the muddy water on
every side start naked children, dark and chubby, hike beautiful little bronzes,
and rush to hide behind their elders, while the bigger ones, surprised in their
bath, hasten to cover themselves with extremely dirty shirts upon our approach.
With some difficulty we pass numerous great grain barges in the narrow canal.
Now and again we glide under some arched bridge plainly of ancient date, and we
notice here and there foundations and bits of walls which certainly must have
supported more worthy buildings than the hovels which crown them at present.

Next we drift between banks green with willows, through a fresh smiling country
of rice plantations and fields of cereals of every description, and at last we
come out of the narrow canals into a vast sheet of water known as Anchar, a
shallow lagoon where the flat bottoms of our boats keep touching and even
running aground on the least deviation from the narrow channel, for the passage
is not free from sandbanks. On every side the aquatic vegetation is so dense
that it would seem like a field were it not for the light skiffs gliding hither
and thither over the surface, rowed by women who are busily gathering masses of
vegetation to form their floating gardens. Over the whole swamp fly flocks of
water birds.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE SIND.](Karakoram_047.jpg "THE SIND."){#b047}
::::

The Sind river, the biggest confluent of the Jhelum, flows with its undivided
stream into this lagoon. Its lower course is winding and swift, hemmed in
between low earth-banks, portions of which are constantly falling into the
water, which eats them away. The river, now at low water, was about the size of
the Tiber in moderate flood. When we entered the channel our rowers got out on
the shore and placed themselves in a file, each putting around him a loop of a
long rope, by which they towed the boats at a run with the assistance of a crowd
of handsome, half-naked lads, who had apparently been on the look-out for our
arrival. Our course now turns eastward toward the snowy mountains, and we make
straight for the Sind valley, whose gate is guarded by the mighty peak of
Haramuk^[^0309]^, which rears its crown of glaciers to a height of nearly 12,000 feet
above the plain (16,903 feet above sea level). This is the largest of the
mountains which encircle the vale of Kashmir. Dr. E. F. Neve, with G. Millais,
ascended it for the first time in 1899.^[^0307]^ It was once more climbed in 1907 by A.
L. Mumm and Major Bruce.^[^0308]^ From one of the western peaks of Haramuk,
known as Station Peak, about 16,000 feet high, Colonel Montgomerie in 1858 saw
K^2^ for the first time, at a distance of 137 miles across the Deosai plains,
and measured it by triangulation.^[^0310]^

We reached Gunderbal, at the mouth of the Sind valley, about 5 o'clock in the
afternoon. The Maharajah, Sir Pratab Singh. who was then still in Jammu, had
made arrangements to show hospitality to the Duke, notwithstanding his absence.
A dozen state tents had been set up on the bank under the shade of the splendid
chenar trees, and four state house-boats were tied up on the bank, so that there
was room for a far more numerous expedition than ours.

Beyond the river bank the vast rice-fields stretched to the foot of the
mountains. Not far from the camp are the ruins of an ancient bridge which once
crossed the Sind. Three arches and two or three broken piles are still standing.
No road leads to it now. The horses that are to carry our luggage to-morrow, as
well as four fine saddle ponies which the Maharajah has placed at our disposal
to take us up to the first snows of the Sind valley, are grazing in the
surrounding fields.

The dungas with our luggage and guides arrived a few hours after us. The loaded
boats drew more water and had therefore been sent around by the Jhelum and
along a canal which connects it with the Sind river. spending a night on the
way.

We went to bed early on the charpoys of the house-boats. The murmur of the
river, the lapping of water round the sides of the houseboat, the sound of an
oar dipping in the stream, called up images remote indeed from the Himalaya.
Every now and then a dull thud shakes our floating house—it has been struck by
one of the numerous tree trunks which the river carries down.
:::

[^0300]: [According to KNIGHT and YUNGHUSBAND (opp. citt.) Srinagar signifies ”City of the sun”; according to UJFALVY, “City of healing,” from the Sanscrit Cri-nagara (CH. DE UJFALVY, *Les Aryens au nord et qu sud de l'Hindu Kouch.* Paris 1896).]{.footnote}

[^0301]: [JAMES FERGUSSON, *History of Indian and Eastern Architecture.* 2nd ed. London 1910 2 vols.]{.footnote}

[^0302]: [Among the best are: BARON C. VON HÜGEL, *Kashmir und das Reich der Sick.* Vienna 1840; W. MOORCROFT and G. TREBECK, *Travels in the Himalayan Provinces of Hindustan*, etc. (ed. by H. Hayman Wilson). London 1841. 2 vols.; G. T. VIGNE. Travels in Kashmir, etc. London 1842. 2 vols.; TH. THOMSON, *Western Himalaya and Thibet*. London 1852; SIR A. CUNNINGHAM, *Ladak and Surrounding Countries.* London 1854; the voluminous works of H. VON SCHLAGINTWEIT and the volume of F. DREW already cited. Among more recent books. *Kashmir* by SIR FRANCIS YOUNGHUSBAND is very valuable, the author being qualified not only his long career as Resident but also by his travels in the most remote parts of the kingdom.]{.footnote}

[^0303]: [See the itinerary man From Rawal Pindi to the Baltoro Glacier.]{.footnote}

[^0304]: [GUILLARMOD is mistaken when he says (*Sir mors dans l' Himalaya,* etc., p. 47) that the table-land of Kashmir is comprised between the Himalaya to the south and the Karakoram to the north. Nor does the Karakoram separate Kashmir from Tibet, as he seems to think, but in reality lies between Baltistan and Chinese Turkestan.]{.footnote}

[^0305]: [*Zoji La*: compare [Zoji La](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zoji_La)]{.footnote}

[^0306]: [W. MOORCROFT was the first European to give us any precise information about the Dras route. Both the Dras and the Deosai routes between Srinagar and Skardu are described in detail by Vigne and Thomson in the books already cited.]{.footnote}

[^0307]: [E. F. NEVE, *The Ascent of Haramuk. Alp. Jour.* 20, 1900, p. 122.]{.footnote}

[^0308]: [A. L. MUMM, *In and About Kashmir. Alp. Jour.* 24, 1898, p. 195.]{.footnote}

[^0310]: [*Synopsis of Results G. T. S.*  VII. Dehra Dun 1879, p. xxx.]{.footnote}

[^0309]: [*Haramuk*: refer [Haramukh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmukh)]{.footnote}
