# CHAPTER V.<br /> ZOJI LA. {#five .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Ethnological and Commercial Importance. — The Gorge of Battal. — The Pass in
Summer. — Geology. — The Gumber Valley. — The Metjuhoy Glacier. — Minimurg. —
The Plateau of Mutajun. — Pandras. — The Last Gorges of the Valley. — The Dras
Basin. — Fort and Bungalow. — Population. — Farewell to Kashmir. <br /><br />
::::

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_063.jpg ""){#b063}
::::

ZOJI LA^[^0305]^ is the Tibetan name of a pass which has the greatest historical and
commercial importance. It is 11,230 feet above sea level,^[^0501]^ and is the lowest
point in the Himalayan ridge between the Indus valley and the vale of Kashmir.
From time immemorial it has been the great trade route between Chinese Turkestan
and Tibet on one hand and India on the other. It was by this gate that the Sikhs
invaded and conquered Ladakh and Baltistan in the first half of the nineteenth
century. The telegraph connecting Srinagar with Leh, the capital of Ladakh, and
Skardu, the capital of Baltistan, crosses the Zoji La. Once a week all the year
round the post runner crosses it with his bag: but for five months at least it
is quite blocked to beasts of burden, horses or yaks, and it is often extremely
dangerous, even if not absolutely impracticable, for parties of coolies. Many a
caravan has perished there of cold and exhaustion, lost in the bewildering
tumults of snow which are common in winter and spring. Still more numerous are
the victims of the avalanches which pile up vast deposits of snow in the gorge
of Baltal. This snow often remains until late in the summer, and occasionally
does not entirely melt before the following autumn. The crossing of the pass in
April with a party of over 300 coolies was an undertaking by no means free from
anxiety. We left Baltal bungalow on the 28th before dawn. The night was dark,
the sky clouded, and a fine rain was falling. The air was heavy and warmish,
just the weather for avalanches. We stopped for a few minutes at the old
bungalow beyond the torrent to see the last of the coolies off; then we started
up the narrow gorge which leads to the pass.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE ZOJI LA.](Karakoram_064.jpg "THE ZOJI LA."){#b064}
::::

On the short level at the foot of the steep ascent we got ahead of nearly all
the coolies, who were toiling through the soft snow, stopping for breath every
200 yards. The sight was an indescribable one, weird and fantastic as a scene in
the wildest legend. As we plodded along the track at the even gait of the
mountaineer, our lanterns threw an unearthly light on the features of the
coolies resting in long files, with the shapeless loads upon the crutch at their
backs, transforming them into strange hump-backed dwarfs. An immense length of
black shadow stretched behind them on the snow. The ceaseless murmur of voices
and confused shouting came to our ears from the farther groups, who moved
restlessly and dimly in the feeble light from the lanterns, like men lost and
astray in some dreadful gulf shunt off on every side by towering cliffs. As for
the surroundings, we could hardly distinguish the faint glimmer of the snow on
the lower rooks. Higher up it melted altogether into the sombre atmosphere,
beneath the unrelieved blackness of the inky sky.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE TOP OF THE PASS.](Karakoram_065.jpg "THE TOP OF THE PASS."){#b065}
::::

The way ascended straight up the gorge over the fallen avalanches, with which it
was filled up. The Shikari Abdullah led the way along the steep track, which ran
in zig-zags across the snow slope, and kept urging us to quicken our steps,
especially at points where big stones and tell-tale lumps of hardened snow
marked fresh falls from the overhanging cliffs. We followed in silence,
breathing hard from the quick measure of the pace, which was quite out of
proportion to the gradient of the climb, and keeping close together to make the
most of the scanty light of our two lanterns.

This account must be difficult of belief to those who have crossed the col in
the summer months, when it is a pleasant trip to ride over on the easy,
clean-cut path which traverses the side of the valley well above the rocks which
overhang the right side of the gorge.

In two hours we reached the top. The steep ascent suddenly stopped, and we
entered a sort of corridor about 500 yards wide, full of snow and walled in by
mountains from 14,000 to 17,000 feet high—so level, that we went on for about
half a mile without noticing where the water-shed came. When the snows are gone
there are pleasant meadows here, and in the middle a little lake fed by springs,
which swell so high during the melting of the snows as to overflow on both
slopes (Roero di Cortanze); but at low water in summer it has only one outlet,
which runs northward to form the source of the Gumber torrent.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE UPPER GUMBER VALLEY.](Karakoram_066.jpg "THE UPPER GUMBER VALLEY."){#b066}
::::

These curious features have drawn the attention of geologists to the Zoji La.
Burrard and Hayden are of opinion that the indentation was cut through the ridge
by a prehistoric river. Oestreich finds in it a proof of the progressive erosion
of the Baltal gorge, accompanied by the gradual withdrawal of the water-shed
line. The Zoji La is, in fact, often quoted as a conspicuous example of the type
of erosion known as ”back-cutting.” a process which may ultimately result in the
complete cutting through of a range, and concerning which I shall have a few
words to say farther on.

We reached the pass at dawn. Here the rain was replaced by sleet, which during
the night had deposited a layer of some four inches of ice crystals on top of
the old snow. The misty and hesitating dawn was followed by a glorious day, and
the outlines of the mountains grew clear and hard against the perfect limpidity
of the sky.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![GOING DOWN TO MUTAJUN.](Karakoram_067.jpg "GOING DOWN TO MUTAJUN."){#b067}
::::

The level passage at the top of the pass runs some mile and a half northward
almost without a slope. Then it bends gently eastward and widens out into the
real Gumber valley, which is ample and level, a perfect specimen of a
round-bottomed valley. Full of snow as it now was and altogether treeless, it
had the appearance of a glacial valley. A little lower down the thick floor of
snow was broken through here and there, leaving short reaches of the torrent
exposed. The descent is broken into low steps dividing level terraces. and the
whole drop is very small. Some four miles from the pass we cross under the foot
of the Metjuhoy glacier, which falls from the Kanipatri and ends not far from
the path at an altitude of about 10,800 feet. A little farther on, on the ridge
of the spur, is the bungalow of Minimurg, the highest in  the valley. Here we
found milk and eggs which Mr. Baines had thoughtfully sent up for us. We rested
about an hour, admiring the northern glaciers of the Kanipatri group; then we
proceeded leisurely on our way to the Mutajun bungalow, about four miles farther
down, which makes a better division of the distance between Baltal and Dras. The
Duke prudently lost no time on the way, and kept far ahead of us all. We paid
for our lazy and intermittent march by having to go through the soft snow
exposed to the intense reverberation of the sun, which gave a sense of
unendurable heat, though the actual temperature was about 24° F.

A succession of level bits and short descents brought us to a vast flat reach of
valley shrouded in a sheet of snow, and crossed by the telegraph wire stretched
on a straight line of posts which the track follows.^[^0502]^

The path led past the middle of the plain to a group of hovels, so low that a
cow had climbed on to the roof of one of them and stood gazing disconsolately
from her vantage point upon the heavy cloak of snow covering the pastures. In
the muddy square between the hovels other cows and a pony, all extremely thin,
wandered aimlessly. A dozen natives, men and children, wretched, ragged and
mud-covered, watched our passage with indifference. Such is the village of
Mutajun, over 10,000 feet in altitude. A hundred yards farther on, beyond a
small torrent, stands the bungalow, which we reached with joy towards 2 o'clock,
and found the Duke had got there two hours before us. Upon a ridge 1,500 feet
above us stands a little group of stunted birches. These are the only trees in
sight. The sharp eves of the Shikari discovered on the rocks of the nearer hills
several ibexes, the chamois of the Himalaya. We looked at them with interest.

All through the afternoon the coolies kept dropping in, weary with the laborious
day’s march, and coming in numbers to ask for medicine for headache, slight
sun-blindness and other trivial complaints. We all agreed in estimating the
march at 18 mules at least, notwithstanding guides and route books, which give
it as 15 miles. Owing to the deep snow we left again before dawn on the
following day, April 29th, so as to make the most of the colder hours. We
crossed the rest of the plain of Mutajun and entered a long, winding narrow part
of the valley, Where at several points at the foot of the rocks which reflect
the heat of the sun were bits of path quite free from snow. Again the valley
grew wider, and we passed the village of Pandras, which appeared to be
uninhabited with the exception of one young yak, wandering in the empty alleys
between the houses. A little hay from the preceding year was still piled on the
flat roofs of the houses.

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-right }
![MUTAJUN.](Karakoram_069.jpg "MUTAJUN."){#b069}
::::

Next comes another long defile, a scenes of narrow gorges which mark the end of
the Gumber valley. The snow grew gradually less. As we turned a corner we saw
before us a group of saddle-ponies, which had been brought by Mr. Baines to meet
the expedition. We mounted, and soon entered the great basin of Dras, a wide
plain surrounded by rocky mountains covered with snow to the very foot, which
gave it the imposing appearance of a high Alpine valley. Torrents flow down on
every side, cutting deep channels in the alluvial soil of the plain, where they
meet to form the river Dras. The plain is dotted with springs and fountains.
Along the foot of the mountains stretch great alluvial banks, which rise to a
great height over the valley, reminding us of the karewas of the Kashmir plain.
In the very midst of the valley, conspicuous from all sides, stands an isolated
square fort, with towers at the corners. This is a relic of the Sikh conquest.
Only the outer walls still stand, though partly dilapidated, built out of round
pebbles embedded in mud. The plain is scattered with groups of houses, and other
villages perch like the *rocche* of the Roman campagna upon the margins of the
alluvial banks. The houses are all flat-roofed, with thick stone walls the
colour of the soil and small windows like loopholes, few and far between. The
alluvial terraces with their level tops and their steep regular flanks, like an
escarpment, give the impression of huge earthworks and bastions.

The whole has the look of a gigantic fortification.

The country is arid and treeless. A few hundred feet from the fort stands a
little group of poplar trees with a wall around it. Close by are some half-dozen
huts, among them the post and telegraph office and the meteorological station.

The dak bungalow reminds one of a Swiss chalet, with the chimneys in its roof
and no verandah, obviously built to protect rather from the cold than from the
heat. It stands a little way up on the left side of the valley, on a level open
space. We reached it at about 10 o'clock with appetites worthy of the excellent
breakfast Mr. Baines had had prepared for us.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE FORT AT DRAS.](Karakoram_070.jpg "THE FORT AT DRAS."){#b070}
::::

After breakfast we came out to the open space before the bungalow to wait for
our coolies. Our arrival had been the signal for the gathering together of all
the natives of the place, and we were immediately struck by the variety of
types. The fact is that the population of Dras^[^0503]^ is a mixture of Kashmiris, Baltis
and Brokpas of the Dard stock, with Ladakhis, who are Mongolians. Their chief
occupation consists in acting as porters to caravans which cross the Zoji La, as
the resources of the country are too scanty to maintain them. The crops are
wretched, in spite of the abundant natural irrigation of the valley, because the
altitude—10,060 feet above sea level—causes extreme excesses of climate: long,
cold winters and summers with burning days and chilly
nights. The greatest source of wealth are the cattle, which flourish owing to
the abundance of fodder, consisting of a plant called *prangos*, that grows for
a great distance up the mountain sides and in sufficient quantity to feed the
cattle throughout the winter.

A couple of hours after our arrival the coolies began to come in. The loads were
now sorted out and once more counted. Then we proceeded to the payment. Every
coolie got four rupees and four annas for his services from Gund, and had to
return the metal counter and smoked spectacles. A caravan of ponies was next
formed and loaded with 120 of the packages, which were sent straight on. on the
Skardu route. A wintry wind blew all day. Only a few crows and magpies hopped
around the bungalow.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BUNGALOW.](Karakoram_071.jpg "THE BUNGALOW."){#b071}
::::

We were kept busy until late in the evening writing *cits* for the officials,
great and small, who had accompanied us hither. They all wanted one, and begged
for it with such insistence that we were finally obliged to establish
hierarchical limits. beyond which we refused to satisfy their greed, in order
not to spend the night writing cits. This was our final farewell to Kashmir.

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0501]: [According to Burrard the height is 11,300 feet. Oestreich gives 11,319. Guillarmod, owing evidently to a seribal error, calls it “au dessus des 5000 metres“ (about 17,000 feet) (op. cit. pp. 75-80, and at foot of illustration on p. 79).]{.footnote}

[^0502]: [In the whole of the Gumber valley the telegraph line has been set up according to the usual rules with telegraph posts, insulators, etc., and must have been entirely rebuilt since 1902, when Guillarmod found the wire “aecroeché a nimporte quoi, un trone mort, une branche d’arbre (?)—souvent méme . . . posé sur la neige, ou recouvert par elle“ (op. cit. p. 78). Only at certain points of the Dras and Indus valleys did we find the wire merely tied to the posts without insulators.]{.footnote}

[^0503]: [*Dras*: refer [Dras](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dras)]{.footnote}
