# CHAPTER VII<br /> THE INDUS VALLEY. {#seven .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Character. — Geological Chaos. — Stone-falls, Landslips, Deposits and Erosions.
— Alluvial Cones. — Signs of Climatic Change. — The Temporary Damming of the
Valleys. — Great Historical Floods. — Oases. — Irrigation Canals. — The Skardu
Route. — The Formation of the Caravan.—The Order of the Marches. —
Saddle-ponies. — Coolies. — The Escort. — Climate. — The Camp. — Kashmiri
Servants. — Camp Work. — Cook and  Kansamah.<br /><br />
::::

:::: { .wrap-80s  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_092.jpg ""){#b092}
::::

THE striking peculiarities of the Dras valley had made a strong impression upon
us. But not until we reached the Indus valley did we realize to the full the
nature of this land of desolation and sterility. The gigantic scale of all the
features does not grow upon one until after days and days of sojourn in this
strange scenery, because the perfect proportions of the valleys and their
enclosing hills keep the traveller under an illusion as to their actual
dimensions.

In the Alps one has the impression that everything has been moulded in a remote
past, and reached once and for all a settled state. The ancient gashes and sears
are cloaked with a mantle of verdure which hides the great wounds and
mutilations left by prehistoric landslides. The rocks have been polished by the
hand of time; they are overgrown with moss and lichens; no ledge, no crevice, is
without its plant life. A rock-fall here, a landslip there, seems to matter as
little as grains of sand that slide down the dunes.

But in Baltistan the colossal forces of nature may be seen in active operation.
Geological evolution is proceeding with such obvious plainness that the
traveller feels as though he were beholding a country in a state of formation
and witnessing the modelling of the earth’s crust. Cliffs fall and mountains are
disintegrated. The slow work of the waters hollows out gorges and hews their
walls into new shapes, almost under one’s eyes, with such activity and on such a
scale that nothing elsewhere can be compared with it.

The impressiveness of these geological forces is so great that the barrenness of
the earth seems on the whole quite justified, as if the vegetation were only
waiting for the earth to acquire a settled shape before clothing it. Animal life
appears to be limited to a few insects and lizards, which are still in their
winter sleep. The few species of timid mammals remain in the high nullahs^[^0700]^ or
valleys. Now and then a brilliant jay or a few crows fly about the oases, and
sometimes we see a great vulture or hawk soaring high above the valley.

The whole land is one vast labyrinth of high, barren, desolate mountain chains,
of cliffs split and shattered in every direction, usually precipitous;
overhanging valleys full of rocks and stones, pebbles and sand; detritus of all
shapes and sizes hurled down in avalanches and mingled with vast accumulations
of alluvial deposit. The disintegration is so continual and on so vast a scale
that the general aspect of the valleys must perforce change at many points every
few years. Traces of avalanches are everywhere visible, signs of ancient or
recent cataclysms, boulders polished to a shining red-brown surface by time and
the action of water, lying alongside of huge blocks, whose clear-cut fractures
seem of yesterday, at the feet of rock walls torn with fresh gashes.

Sir Martin Conway attributes this remarkable decay of the rocks solely to
climatic causes—drought and swift and extreme changes of temperature. But surely
a great part must be played by the absolute lack of any layer of vegetation
which would protect the live rock from the direct action of excessive heat or
frost, and by absorbing the waters to hinder them from bursting in sudden
torrents down into the valleys. The bed of the valleys alters its shape
incessantly. Unremittingly the river gnaws, wears down and digs out its bed, and
shifts, rolls and drags down millions of tons of matter, which it deposits
wherever the current slackens above a narrow gorge or pile of boulders, only to
move them again once the obstacle is removed or cut through.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE INDUS BELOW THE MOUTH OF THE DRAS.](Karakoram_094.jpg "THE INDUS BELOW THE MOUTH OF THE DRAS."){#b094}
::::

The layers of detritus and sediment sometimes attain a thickness of 1,000 feet
or more. The sedimentary deposits are of every species and variety: banks of the
finest and purest clay, pebbles, agglomerates of every variety and period. They
usually take the form of terraces cut steep down to the river. They are not,
however, invariably at the bottom of the valley, the remains of ancient
sedimentary deposits sometimes clinging to the walls up to a great height.
Thomson found clay deposits between 1,000 and 2,000 feet above the stream, as
high up as the brow of the cliffs along the valley; and Schlagintweit found
deposits of pebbles and sand from 3,000 to 4,000 feet above the actual level of
the water.^[^0701]^ Such deposits, as well as the places where the rock walls have been
gnawed away, hollowed out and cut by the water into spherical cavities, afford
clear proof that at one time the Indus ran at a far higher level than at present;
or rather, they pot to an uplifting of the whole region, while the river went
on cutting its valley by erosion and maintaining more or less the same level
throughout.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![ALLUVIAL TERRACE AND STRETCH OF PATH BETWEEN KARMANG AND TOLTI.](Karakoram_095.jpg "THE INDUS BELOW THE MOUTH OF THE DRAS."){#b095}
::::

The various levels of the alluvial deposits along the cliffs show that the
upheaval was not continuous, uninterrupted and regular. Oestreich holds that the
whole valley between Dras and Skardu was first cut through, then filled up with
detritus to about 600 feet above the present level, and then once more dug out.^[^0702]^
According to him the present valley would be a recent formation, and the river
would be still actively cutting its way. However this may be, the immense
geological forces have made of the upper Indus one of the longest and wildest
valleys on the face of the earth.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![THE INDUS VALLEY ABOVE KARMANG.](Karakoram_096.jpg "THE INDUS VALLEY ABOVE KARMANG."){#b096}
::::

At first sight the huge sedimentary deposits, often divided into strata, seem to
indicate that the valley was once filled with a series of lake basins. Sir A.
Cunningham and Sir Martin Conway are of opinion that such gigantic sedimentary
formations can be explained in no other way. Thomson had, however, already noted
that this simple theory would explain neither the extraordinary extension of the
sediments—which are to be found with unvarying characteristics throughout the
whole of the Indus valley—nor their immense thickness at various points, nor
their frequent appearance at the mouth of tributary valleys, where they often
take the form of deltas. Drew believes the origin of the deposits to be fluvial,
and very ingeniously explains the stratification of the clay as caused by the
periodic muddiness of the waters and the increase in their volume during the
melting of the snows, which together give rise to deposits of fresh sand and mud
upon the banks.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![VIEW IN THE INDUS VALLEY.](Karakoram_097.jpg "VIEW IN THE INDUS VALLEY."){#b097}
::::

Another objection to the lake hypothesis in the Indus valley lies in the fact
that lakes are extremely rare throughout the Himalayan system. Not only is there
a complete absence of those lakes at the foot of the mountains which are so
typical a feature of our own Alps, but even in the high valleys no considerable
lakes are to be found. The frequent stoppage of the river waters through
temporary damming up of their course has always been, in historic times, of
short duration, a few months at most, and could not have brought about any
permanent modification of the aspect of the valley.

The largest and thickest sedimentary terraces usually he at the mouth of
tributary valleys and lateral gorges, and spread out in the shape of alluvial
fans. They range between a few hundred yards and a few mules across, and form
symmetrical cones, whose apex is frequently a great height above the valley
bottom, while the base towards the river is cut vertically. They are usually
bisected by the tributary watercourse.^[^0703]^

The formation of these huge deltas is certainly hard to explain by the present
climatic conditions of the region. The torrents which flow down the valleys and
lateral gorges are usually little more than rivulets, and in many cases no
longer flow across the delta, but between the latter and the valley wall, on
their way to the main stream. Furthermore, the surface of the cones is usually
sprinkled with numerous blocks and rocks which have fallen from the mountain
sides, often at a remote period, since when it is evident that no new material
has been deposited so as even partially to cover up their bases. Lastly, nearly
all the deltas of any size are covered with cultivation, being, in fact, the
only inhabited parts of the valley, and the aspect of the villages and the
dimensions of the trees prove that from time immemorial there have been no
floods.

These facts seem to me to justify the hypothesis that the present extreme lack
of moisture was preceded by a period during which the streams which flow through
the tributary valleys were, at least during a portion of the year, powerful
torrents capable of carrying down great masses of rock, earth, etc., in amount
sufficient to form these great alluvial cones. After all, it is not improbable
that this belt between the Himalaya and Central Asia may at one time have
enjoyed a moister climate than it does now, considering that a similar state of
things obtained in Central Asia itself, as the evidence gathered by all
explorers there goes to show.

I have already alluded to the temporary damming up of the valleys. Their depth
and their trough-shaped bottom between the steep cliffs, from which landslides
and stone avalanches fall continually, make them especially liable to this
accident. But the strangest form of dam is, without doubt, that produced by a
glacier coming down out of a tributary valley and projecting until it forms a
dyke straight across the main valley. The river, hemmed in by any one of these
causes, naturally forms a temporary reservoir or lake. Sooner or later the
pressure of the water succeeds in undoing the dam and a devastating flood bursts
down into the valley, sweeping before it every trace of villages or cultivated
oases. and bringing ruin down to the far-off plains of India.

In 1841 a landslide in the deep gorge of the Indus to the west of Nanga Parbat
almost — entirely dammed up the course of the river. forming a lake about 40
miles long. Six months later the dam gave way, and the huge reservoir was
emptied in a single day, obliterating every trace of life for 800 miles of
valley. At Attock, where the valley opens into the Punjab plain, Gulab Singh's
Sikh army was encamped. The fearful flood swept it away, destroying 500 men.^[^0704]^
These catastrophes are not confined to the Indus. History records several
similar disasters proceeding from the same causes in the other valleys of the
western Himalaya.^[^0705]^

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-right }
![THE INDUS BELOW TARKUTTA.](Karakoram_099.jpg "THE INDUS BELOW TARKUTTA."){#b099}
::::

In the midst of this geological chaos. lost in the vast stony desert, are humble
human dwellings hidden away in the recesses between the ridges, sometimes so
deeply secluded  among the tremendous precipices of the gorge that the sun
reaches them for one hour only in the twenty-four. With ant-like industry the
inhabitants have succeeded in wresting their nurture from the terrific nature
round them. They have caught every trickle of water, every rivulet fed by high
nevé or glacier, and have led it for miles through carefully constructed
conduits to a point where a little sloping ledge, or more often the surface of
an alluvial delta. permitted of irrigation and culture. All along the march down
the valley you can follow with your eye the tiny far-off water-course, gradually
and evenly descending along the rocky cliffs, always clearly outlined by the
thin green line of shrubs and herbs which follows its precious course, and
sometimes as it descends by veritable avenues of willows or poplars which line
its margins until it ends at the oasis. The line of the little conduit never
deviates as it crosses the steep side of old landslides, precipitous cliffs or
transverse gorges. However small the scale it is a true aqueduct, constructed
with consummate skill and needing ceaseless labour for its upkeep, frail and
undefended as it is among the mighty powers of ruin and destruction.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![THE INDUS VALLEY BELOW TOLTI.](Karakoram_100.jpg "THE INDUS VALLEY BELOW TOLTI."){#b100}
::::

The oases are always cultivated in terraces, each of which contains its little
field surrounded with groups and rows of trees, among which nestle the little
reddish-brown cottages. In the midst of the appalling desert, under the
scorching rays of the sun, the blossoming oasis with its green shade seems like
a miracle, a delight to the eyes of which it is impossible to render the
faintest idea in words. The pink and white blossoms of the apricots gleam in the
faint light of dawn as if they were covered with hoar-frost. Over them rise
tender green willows and slender poplars, just in their first bud and showing
all the delicate design of their branches. Between the trees are set like
emeralds small fields where the green corn is now a few inches high. The soil ts
too valuable to use for anything except corn. Only at the edge of the meadows
and on the brinks of the irrigation canals grows a little grass mingled with
tufts of pale iris leaves, whose buds do not yet show. The skirts of the oasis
end in a perfectly clean line, beyond which lies the illimitable waste of stone.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![A CULTIVATED ALLUVIAL DELTA BELOW TARKUTTA.](Karakoram_101.jpg "A CULTIVATED ALLUVIAL DELTA BELOW TARKUTTA."){#b101}
::::

A poverty-stricken people live upon the verge of starvation in these gardens.
Their neighbours in Ladakh have received from their religion customs and social
laws which prevent the increase of the population, hence their agricultural
resources suffice to give them relative plenty. The Baltis, on the other hand,
have increased through polygamy and concubinage in number beyond all proportion
to the resources of the country, for cultivation is strictly limited to the land
which can be brought under irrigation, and this area is not capable of
extension. Thus they are obliged to emigrate in large numbers to Kashmir, Simla
and the Punjab in search of work and the means of subsistence.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![BETWEEN KARMANG AND TOLTI.](Karakoram_102.jpg "BETWEEN KARMANG AND TOLTI."){#b102}
::::

From the meeting of the Dras and the Indus to Skardu is about 86 miles down the
left bank of the river Indus, with a drop of about 1,500 feet. We covered the
distance in six stages. The path was everywhere in good condition, evidently
lately repaired, so that it was possible to ride the whole way. The Baltis are
the best road-builders in the western Himalaya, and have done a good share of
the important  military roads which lead from Kashmir to the frontier posts of
Chitral and Afghanistan.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![THE PATH ACROSS THE CLIFFS BELOW GOL.](Karakoram_103.jpg "THE PATH ACROSS THE CLIFFS BELOW GOL."){#b103}
::::

The path follows the winding course of the valley, now crossing stretches of
alluvial deposit or flats of fine sand in a wide part of the valley bed, again
creeping across the steep inclines formed by the fall of detritus from the
cliffs. At points where the valley narrows to a gorge between granite precipices
it climbs to a great height to cross the ridges or *parri,* as they call them
here. At other times. to save the wearying ups and downs, a path is made
straight across the face of the precipice. Beams are fixed in the ledges of the
rocks and cross-beams laid over and covered with stones and beaten earth. The
bridge thus formed is supported from beneath by slanting props between the rock
and the edge of the path. The whole forms a sort of ledge hung across the
precipitous rock wall above the swift waves of the Indus, which hurries far
below through its narrow bed.

In some places the sides of the valley are so steep that their crests are not
visible from our path in the bottom of the gorge. Huge precipitous ridges run
down on each side and overlap each other, apparently blocking the way before us.
We have but rare and fleeting glimpses of the higher chains whose rocky spurs
enclose us on every side. Only as we toil across occasional openings of the
valley, sinking at each step into the fine sand, do we get a sight of the
far-off snow-peaks.

In all this distance we do not find a single large confluent on the left side of
the valley. We miss the fresh springs, the little waterfalls and torrents of our
Alps. The torpid stream of the Indus, laden with sand and mud, rolls its grey
waters lazily through open spaces and around curves, where it spreads into a
wide bed with beaches of snow-white sand. Only in the narrow gorges does it flow
rapidly with foaming waves; and it never forms real waterfalls except at one
point a little below Karmang, where it leaps down a step some 15 or 20 feet
high. This waterfall, which was discovered by Conway, is worthy of remark,
because it is such a rare phenomenon in either the small or the great rivers of
the Himalaya. The Indus is a great river, even now when the melting of the snows
has scarcely begun; but it seems small in proportion to the vast size of the
basin from which it is fed—103,823 square miles, about the size of the whole of
Italy, including her islands. The fact helps us to realize the extreme dryness
of the climate.

Our life in the Indus valley was systematically arranged. We were called between
five and half-past in the morning, and immediately began our struggle with the
coolies to prevent their snatching our beds and baggage before they had been
rolled up, closed and got ready. In the great variety of packages formed by our
complicated luggage there were some which the coolies preferred to others, for
though the weight of all was approximately the same, the shape and dimensions of
some pieces made them handier for the back of the coolie or the pony. The men
would very nearly snatch the equipment from our hands, so great was their
impatience, and we had to defend our possessions energetically. Next, while the
guides with the help of our Kashmiri bearers struck and rolled up the tents, we
would get a good English breakfast, prepared by Mr. Baines’ *kansamah.*

Soon after six everything was ready for the start. Negrotto was paymaster of the
caravan, and he would stand on the road with Mr. Baines and Alexis Brocherel and
deal out numbered counters to the   coolies and ponymen as they passed before
him. It was necessary to engage fresh coolies and ponies at nearly every stage,
as they could not leave the field labour of their villages for more than two or
three days. As soon as the last porter was off we would set out ourselves. Sella
usually left the camp before breakfast with his assistant Botta and the coolies
to carry the photographic and cinematographic apparatus. In this way he got more
time to photograph the scenery, and was able to stop on the way with the
cinematograph and catch the expedition on the march at picturesque points of the
road.

Part of the way we walked and part of the way we rode the forlorn-looking ponies
of the district, all dirty and covered with long shaggy hair, but plucky and
willing like their masters. The primitive saddles were so uncomfortable that we
usually preferred to walk, riding only across long reaches of sand, or here and
there for a rest on the march. Between these impossible saddles and the pony’s
back goes the thick folded *namdah* (a species of soft felt manufactured in
Kashgar and used throughout both sides of the Karakoram region), which had a
tendency to slip out and drag saddle and rider with it. Anyone intending to take
a long journey through Baltistan should provide himself with a good leather
saddle in Srinagar.

The first half-hour of our march was always tiresome, until we had passed and
left behind the whole lot of coolies. The smell of these natives is unbearable,
even in the open air, and if you get to leeward of them will simply take your
breath away, even at a distance of a dozen or so yards. They do not, however,
look sickly like the people of the upper Dras valley, but seem robust, healthy
and well fed. They are born porters. Their step is nimble and short, even at the
worst parts of the path, and their halts are frequent and brief. They shave a
large strip in the middle of the head, from the forehead to beyond the crown.
The rest of the hair is allowed to grow long, and falls in curls around the
circular Balti cap. Those of a Semitic type remind one of Polish rabbis; those
whose features are pure Aryan look like Florentine pages of the Renaissance.
Their clothes are of puttoo, originally white, with wide trousers cut short
above the knee, and a coat of the same length, and each is provided with a
blanket shawl of the same wool, which he carries twisted round his waist or
spread on his back to relieve the pressure of the load. The latter is fixed to
the shoulders by strong twisted cords of black and white goat’s hair. All our
parcels were so arranged that they could be tied on to the shoulders direct, but
when they carry their own goods the Baltis use conical baskets of woven withes,
very like those in use among our peasants of the province of Biella. As on his
other expeditions, the Duke had brought from Italy a number of the load-carriers
designed by the Sellas for mountain portage, to carry the more fragile part of
the baggage, such as the meteorological instruments, photographic materials,
etc. The Baltis, however, were quite as firmly set against Innovations as our
own peasants, and insisted on tying both load and load-carrier on to their backs
with cord in the usual manner, instead of passing their arms through the wide
straps which are so much easier for the shoulders and collar-bones of the
porter. Before the end of the campaign, however, Sella did manage to persuade a
number of the coolies who remained longer in our service of the advantage of the
load-carriers, and quite converted them to the system.

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left }
![GROUP OF BALTIS.](Karakoram_106.jpg "GROUP OF BALTIS."){#b106}
::::

One by one we would pass ahead of the coolies on the narrow path, where they
stood on one side to let us go by. At the least encouragement gathered from our
looks their faces would expand in a broad and jovial grin. Bowed down with their
heavy loads, streaming with sweat under the burning sun, they are always ready
for a laugh, and never look hostile or ill-tempered. They were always scattered
in little groups over very long stretches of the road, but the coolies who
carried the treasure kept together under the escort of a chuprassi.

They are a mild and timid people, quite incapable of any sort of violence, noisy
and talkative but not at all quarrelsome, even when they are squabbling over the
coveted pieces of luggage. You never see them maltreat or beat their ponies.
They encourage them with the voice, they shove them or haul them in the worst
bits of the road, but they never beat them, even lightly. When they have any
request to make they join their hands in a supplant attitude or even kneel, yet  
hey have none of the crawling servility of the Kashmiri and their timidity does
not seem like cowardice.

Our guides marched in a group, sometimes at the head of the caravan, sometimes
behind. To their care were entrusted the precious mercury barometers, which were
too fragile to be put into the hands of such primitive people as the coolies.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![COOLIES AT KARMANG.](Karakoram_107.jpg "COOLIES AT KARMANG."){#b107}
::::

In less than an hour we would leave all the porters behind us and find ourselves
alone in the desolate valley. The foreguard of the expedition was rather
numerous. The Duke was invariably escorted by the Shikari Abdullah, the
Tehsildar of the district, and usually by the local Rajah, who would bring with
him one or two Jemadars and Lambardars, a few chuprassis, and usually his
minister or Wazir. The high officials wear turbans of white muslin, the
Lambardars turbans of *pashmina,* a goat's hair tissue which varies in quality
and is sometimes marvellously soft. We were also accompanied by the
tiffin-coolie, who carried the luncheon basket and who was selected for his
running qualities, so that he could follow our ponies even when they trotted.

The sun was very hot and the radiation so intense that we were forced to wear
our pith helmets, although the temperature was not above 60° to 68° F. The air
was very dry, nearly always breezy, and with a slight haze rather of dust than
of moisture.^[^0706]^ Nearly every afternoon towards three o’clock a strong wind arose,
blowing usually from the west or south-west, and raising such clouds of fine
sand that the atmosphere would grow dark like fog up to a very considerable
height.

About ten o'clock we would stop for huncheon in some garden under the shade of
blossoming apricots, or else in one of the tiny groves of poplar and willow
enclosed in a square of wall, which you see now and then on the way, and which
are probably resting-places for the caravans or to shelter the flocks and herds
during the hot hours. I must here mention the existence of a few great solitary
trees which you meet in the very midst of the desert and which appear to be
centuries old, usually dead except for a branch or two, with the trunk half
buried in the sand, but far bigger than any of the trees to be seen in the
cultivated oases. Are they, perhaps, a solitary relic of some ancient
settlement, driven hence by the drying up of the water supply or buried by a
flood or crushed by a landslide?

We usually came to the end of a stage before two o'clock, and set up our camp.
We had six tents in all, of the usual light tropical type, made of Willesden
green canvas. These were for the four of us and for our eight European guides
and porters. Mr. Baines had another tent. The Tehsildar used to make his own
arrangements apart. Another group was formed by the kitchen and the little
cotton tents of the bearers.

Throughout India domestic service is divided among a large number of servants
whose functions are strictly specified and limited by caste exigencies. We had
four bearers—two for our tents, one for our guides and one for the kitchen. They
helped the coolies to set up and strike camp; they waited on us at meals and
brought us water to wash. During the march they were seldom in sight or calling
distance, though they carried the water flasks. But the moment we reached the
stage and sat down they would rush to our feet and proceed to massage our legs
energetically, a most excellent practice, which any coolie can apply if there is
no bearer at hand. It is wise to prevent your private servants from interfering
with your relations with the natives, for whenever the Kashmiri can he takes
advantage of the ignorance and timidity of the Balti.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![PAYING THE COOLIES.](Karakoram_108.jpg "PAYING THE COOLIES."){#b108}
::::

As soon as camp was set up every one would go about his own work. The Duke would
take the daily meteorological data and make comparative readings of the
instruments, which were to be used later to prove that the latter had not shown
variations in the course of the journey. He also gave daily attention to the
general ordering of the expedition, checking the baggage, organizing the parties
to be sent on ahead, and supervising the hundred odd businesses of a caravan on
the march. Vittorio Sella, when he had not stopped behind attracted by some
special beauty of landscape, would wander round the outskirts of the camp
seeking subjects for photography. Negrotto presided over the payment of the
coolies if it was one of the days when the old ones had to be paid off and new
engaged.

Shortly after our arrival sick people would begin to troop in from the villages.
The most common diseases were forms of chronic dermatitis, mange and tinea. It
is possibly from the prevalence of this last that the custom has grown up of
canterizing babies’ heads on the top and above the ears, which Ujfalvy observed
and attributed to a belief in the healing action of fire. Conjunctivitis is very
common, as well as chronic bronchial affections, all forms of disease due to
dirt and pauperism.^[^0707]^ The sick people were frequently brought to me by the Rajah
himself or his Wazir, with a certain degree of affectionate concern. They ask
for medical relief with anxious hope, and take the little tabloids given them
with superstitious reverence and the ingenuous trust of a primitive people in
the wisdom and power of the European. It is, however, almost impossible to be of
much assistance to them in so short & sojourn.

Tea would gather us together again, and we would discuss with the Duke the
future organization of the expedition when we should have left the last village,
and would depend on ourselves, our coolies and our equipment for our only
resources,

Meantime fowls, eggs, sheep and milk have been brought from the village. The
cook of the party is Ernesto Bareux, who is full of goodwill, attentive and
painstaking. But no European can compete with the Indian or Kashmiri cooks for
camp cooking. They know how to use their primitive utensils and to make the most
of the monotonous provisions to he found in the villages, cooking them in an
attractive and varied way.

Mr. Baines’ Kashmiri kansamah used to get luncheon for us all and Bareux the
dinner, so that our supplies and those of Mr. Baines were more or less in
common. This gave rise to an acute rivalry between his native servants and ours.
Not a pinch of salt lent by one culinary   establishment to the other but became
a source of internal bickering, and heaven knows what complications might have
arisen between the two camps had not our guides kept order through their
prestige as Europeans.

By nine o’clock we were all im bed. The temperature used to go down to 41°-45°
F. The Baltis squatted around fires on the outskirts of the camp, and apparently
remained awake the whole night. They certainly chatted up to a very late hour,
and many coughed without interruption. We were roused of a morning by hearing
the ponies being got ready for a start, and greeting each addition to their own
company by noisy, gay and shrill neighing.

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0700]: [*nullah*: refer [Nullah](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nullah)]{.footnote}

[^0701]: [TH. THOMSON, *Journey to the Karakoram Pass. Jour, Roy. Geog, Soc.* 19, 1849, p. 25 SCHLAGINTWEIT *Jour. Asiat. Soc. of Bengal 26*, 1857 (cited by Burrard).]{.footnote}

[^0702]: [GODWIN AUSTEN also mentions this succession of phenomena. See *Geog. Jour.* 25, 1905, p. 245.]{.footnote}

[^0703]: [Sir M. Conway thinks that the angle of the slope of these fans proves that they are formed by landslides and not by matter brought down by the streams. His observations were made in a portion of the Bunji valley between Astor and Gilgit, but I do not think the theory would apply to the Indus valley, where the deltas show the typical characteristics of alluvial cones.]{.footnote}

[^0704]: [This disaster was for a long time attributed to the damming up of the Shyok valley, a tributary of the Indus above Skardu (SIR A. CUNNINGHAM, op. cit.). Years subsequently Drew discovered the real cause. Beside Drew, D. FASER has described this fearful inundation (see *The Marches of Hindustan.* London 1907); also BURRARD, op. cit.]{.footnote}

[^0705]: [One of the greatest was the destruction of the city of Bilaspur in 1762, through the sudden giving way of a dam which had been formed in the river Sutlej by a landslide and had held up against the water for forty days.]{.footnote}

[^0706]: [See in the scientific appendix the tables of meteorological observations put together by Professor Omodei from the data collected by the Duke. The relative humidity of the air, which in the Sind valley had been -44, -88 and -89, came down to -70, -71, -63 and -64 in the Dras valley, and -07, -05, -0, -04, -22 and -16 in the Indus valley, with a tension of aqueous vapour almost invariably below the unit.]{.footnote}

[^0707]: [In Tarkutta alone I have noted down one ease of old dislocation of the thigh, one of double cataract, pterigion, gastro-intestinal helmenthiasis with uncontrollable vomiting, Bright's disease, two cases of heart disease, one of infantile paralysis—of which last disease I observed victims in several villages.]{.footnote}
