# CHAPTER VIII<br /> FROM OLTHINGTHANG TO SKARDU. {#eight .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Meeting of the Dras and the Indus. — Tarkutta. — The Castle of Karmang. —
The First Jhula Bridge. — Tolti. — Exchange of Tehsildars. — Parkutta. — Polo.
Basin. — Lacustrian and Glacial Theories. — We enter the Balti Capital. —
Official Visits. — The Forts of Skardu. — The Polo Ground, — Arrangements and
Contracts for the Expedition. <br /><br />
::::

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_110.jpg ""){#b110}
::::

IN the foregoing chapter I have given a general account of the Indus valley,
which I will now supplement with a few notes of the journey, so as to call
attention to the more interesting details of each place and give a clearer idea
of the part of the valley through which the expedition marched.

We entered the Indus valley on the morning of May 3rd, after an hour’s march
from Olthingthang. The meeting of the rivers takes place at the bottom of a
precipitous gorge, where the path has to cross a spur of granite 1,000 feet
above the level of the rivers. Beyond this spur it descends to the bank of the
Indus, which it follows for a short distance. Then it is again forced to climb a
high ridge of sedimentary deposit, from the top of which a precipitous way leads
to Tarkutta, a village built on an alluvial terrace some 300 feet above the
stream. We passed through the whole village. which is shaded with walnut and
apricot trees, and set up our camp at the foot of the oasis, near a wide beach
of very fine dove-coloured sand on the bank of the Indus. It was so hot that we
were tempted to bathe, and to our great surprise found the water icy cold.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![Confluence of the Dras with the Indus.](Karakoram_111.jpg "Confluence of the Dras with the Indus."){#b111}
::::

On the following day we proceeded down the valley northward, following the path
up and down over ridges or across the face of precipices or over reaches of sand
scattered with granite boulders. At one point there is a veritable torrent of
huge snow-white blocks, whose origin is seen on glancing at the great white scar
newly left exposed at the top of the overhanging precipice.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![KARMANG, THE CASTLE AND THE RAJAH’S HOUSE.](Karakoram_113.jpg "KARMANG, THE CASTLE AND THE RAJAH’S HOUSE."){#b113}
::::

Around a bend of the river we catch sight of a picturesque castle standing sight
up on the opposite bank. The architecture is complex, and although a part of the
roof is gone, the building is not in ruins. This is the old fort of Karmang, now
no longer inhabited by the Rajah, who lives in a little house at the foot of the
same rock, near the river. Around his house is a garden containing other huts
inhabited by his family and dependents, while a little farther on is the village
of Karmang, or Kartash, with about 500 inhabitants.

On our side of the river, nearly opposite the village, stands on a sandy level
the little dak bungalow, exactly like that of Karal in the Dras valley. Upon the
table in its single room were arranged plates containing lilac blossoms and
chupattis, the small round cakes which are the bread of the region. This was an
attention of the Rajah, who had come as far as Olthingthang to meet us. Later he
came over to pay his official visit, accompanied by a ragged Wazir and bringing
his two little boys, whose features were so fine as to be almost effeminate.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BUNGALOW AT KARMANG.](Karakoram_114.jpg "THE BUNGALOW AT KARMANG."){#b114}
::::

The village of Karmang communicates with the left bank of the Indus and thence
with the Skardu^[^0809]^ and Kashmir road by means of a long rope bridge across the
Indus. This was our first experience of these strange bridges known as *jhula*.
They are to be found in every part of the Himalaya, and are made either of canes
fastened together in bundles, or of cords, or of plaited grasses as in Sikkim,
or of withes of willow or birch twisted into ropes, as in Baltistan and Tibet.
While the camp was being set up near the bungalow two of our party, impatient to
experience the sensations we had so often read of in books of Himalayan travel,
climbed up on the big pile of heavy stones which holds the ends of the cables
forming the treadway and balustrades of the bridge. These three cables stretch
across the river in parallel curves. One, which is thicker than the others,
hangs somewhat lower, and upon this you walk, while the smaller cables are
higher up and are arranged one on each side to hold by with your hands. At
intervals of about two yards thin bands join the footway cable to the
side-ropes, so that the whole thing takes the shape of a sort of skeleton trough
with a pointed bottom. The two ropes which form the handrails are kept a certain
distance apart by cross-bars fitted into them at intervals of 10 or 12 yards.
The only difficulty of crossing consists in climbing over these cross-bars, and
the greatest danger is of scratching your hands on the sharp points of the birch
twigs which project everywhere from the rough cables.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![JHULA BRIDGE AT KARMANG.](Karakoram_115.jpg "JHULA BRIDGE AT KARMANG."){#b115}
::::

On the whole jhula bridges are simple, strong and cheap, and the system might do
good service in some of our own mountain valleys. The crossing is really
perfectly simple, and offers no difficulty as long as the bridge is properly
kept up and the cables taut. But when half of the cross-bars are broken and the
bridge sags in the middle owing to the relaxing of the cables, the crossing may
become most disagreeable, especially when the wind blows the whole thing about
like a swing. None of us ever suffered from giddiness even when the bridges were
hung very high over swift torrents. But you have a feeling as though the bridge
were being carried upstream and you with it. As a rule from four to six people
are able to cross at a time, but if the condition of the cables is doubtful only
two should try it at once. It is related of the Greek hermitages among the high
cliffs of Thessaly that the rope which is used to pull people up to the
threshold in a basket is never changed until it breaks, and every one takes his
chance. The same tale is, of course, told of the jhula bridges, and Oriental
inertia and fatalism may give it a semblance of truth. It is, however, somewhat
difficult to prove.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BALTI BRIDGE MADE OF TWISTED BRANCHES.](Karakoram_116.jpg "BALTI BRIDGE MADE OF TWISTED BRANCHES."){#b116}
::::

Near Karmang the valley narrows into a gorge, which Thomson gives as the end of
the basin of a great lake which, in his opinion, used to reach from here as far
as Rondu, a little below Skardu. From here the valley slopes north-eastward in a
wide curve round the foot of the Deosai table-land, and now grows a little
wider, notwithstanding a number of narrow twists and bends into which it is
forced by a series  of very steep rocky spurs. Just beyond one of these, which
forms a precipice overhanging the river, lies the great oasis of Tolti^[^0800]^, which
fills the whole width of the tributary valley of Kusuro Cho. The green glade
thus shut in by steep mountain walls is covered with luxuriant vegetation, among
which, in addition to the usual apricots, poplars and willows, we noted walnut,
pear, plane and mulberry trees, the last festooned with fronds of grape-vine.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![THE CAMP AT TOLTI.](Karakoram_117.jpg "THE CAMP AT TOLTI."){#b117}
::::

Our way led uphill through the large and prosperous village, and we passed
beyond the dak bungalow to the polo ground, which is about 300 feet long and
100 feet wide, running across the little valley and surrounded by shady trees,
quite at the top of the oasis. Here the Duke was welcomed by the Rajah of the
district, who resides at Parkutta, our stage for the next day. He was a man in
the prime of life, wearing a round beard dyed with henna, and swathed in white
muslin with a big white turban on his head, like a Mullah. The Tehsildar of
Skardu also came to Tolti to meet the Duke, and the Kargil Tehsildar took his
leave, as we had reached the confines of his jurisdiction.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE CROWD ON THE POLO GROUND AT TOLTI.](Karakoram_118.jpg "THE CROWD ON THE POLO GROUND AT TOLTI."){#b118}
::::

At the polo ground was gathered a crowd of several hundred people, kept in
bounds with unwonted severity by chuprassis. Throughout the last two stages the
whole of the luggage had been carried on the backs of coolies, but at Tolti we
were again able to hire ponies. It was the first place where the coolies seemed
unwilling to enter into an engagement. The Rajah and his high officials marched
about in the crowd, seized hold of the more refractory subjects and practically
dragged them into our presence. Perhaps on some former occasion they had been
defrauded of their pay, because throughout our journey we always found the
natives rather anxious to be engaged. Some of the horses, too, were
recalcitrant, refused to be loaded, kicked and rolled. These were, no doubt,
polo ponies, who objected to the degradation of carrying loads.

The afternoon was windy as usual, but the little valley was sheltered by the
hills and so green that we had neither sand nor dust, and enjoyed to the utmost
the cool shade of the trees. Little rivulets ran all round our camp, and their
murmur mingled with the rustling of the leaves in the breeze.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![A MOSQUE OF THE HIGH INDUS VALLEY.](Karakoram_119.jpg "A MOSQUE OF THE HIGH INDUS VALLEY."){#b119}
::::

The next stage was of about five and a half hours, and was more diverse and
entertaining than the preceding ones. During the second half the way runs
through several villages whose gardens join, forming wide belts of vegetation,
where the path is all in the shade. The houses are better built, some of
sun-baked bricks. and the occupants even indulge in the luxury of a verandah.
Now and again the windows have carved wooden frames. There were a few mosques
with flat roofs formed by long transverse beams resting upon uprights and outer
walls of masonry, now and then strengthened by incorporating the trunks of
trees. as in the houses of Srinagar. The eastern facade was adorned with a
portico.

Parkutta is a big village standing over 300 feet above the river, built upon
both sides of a deep ravine cut through the thick alluvial deposit by a torrent.
As in Karmang the old palace of the Rajah stands upon a high rock dominating the
town. At the entrance of the village the Duke was greeted by a musical band that
marched before the caravan as far as the polo ground, which is much larger than
the one at Tolti. The players squatted on their heels in the middle of the polo
ground. Their instruments were drums, tambourines, horns and a gigantic straight
trumpet. A big crowd had gathered round, presenting a lively spectacle. The
front rows squatted upon their heels, those behind them stood up, and behind
these others perched upon the wall enclosing the ground. Some of the young
children and boys wore crowns of leaves. Later on they adorn themselves with
flowers. We saw some Baltis with black or dark hair and a fair beard or
moustache. The whole population spent a great part of the afternoon on the polo
ground, grouped around three sides of the square at a distance of some 50 yards
from us. They seemed to be naturally polite, respectful and orderly.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![CEMETERY AT PARKUTTA.](Karakoram_120.jpg "CEMETERY AT PARKUTTA."){#b120}
::::

Hardly had our tents been set up when the Duke received the official visit of
the Rajah, who was followed by a servant carrying his son and heir, a child of
four or five years old, dressed in bright colours and with a turban quite out of
proportion to his slender little neck. He was very serious, and saluted us with
amusing gravity, lifting his little hand to his forehead. Servants brought
dishes of cakes and two huge copper teapots full of Balti tea, a sweetish greasy
beverage, pale pink in colour. The orchestra then began to play again, and four
dancers whirled slowly round and round on their own axis, following the cadence
with the rhythmic motions of the arms and head common to all Oriental dancing.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![A DANCER AT PARKUTTA.](Karakoram_121.jpg "A DANCER AT PARKUTTA."){#b121}
::::

At four o'clock in the afternoon a game of polo was organized in honour of the
Duke. Twelve players took part. In the excitement of the game horses and men
totally changed their aspect. It seems strange that a game which requires so
much pluck, strength and dexterity should have been evolved among a people of
timid disposition, and in so many ways rough and primitive. It is, however,
improbable  that polo was, as Ujfalvy would have us believe, invented in
Baltistan, a country so rough that, with few exceptions, there is no place for
galloping outside the polo grounds themselves, which are levelled and beaten on
purpose. The origin of the game is certainly remote. It seems to have been
common at the court of the Mogols. Then the tradition was lost in India, and
only kept up at Manipur (on the confines of Burma), in Baltistan, Ladakh and
Gilgit.t| The English of Calcutta learned the game in Manipur, and were so
attracted by its fine and manly qualities that they made it their own and have
diffused it throughout the world.^[^0801]^

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BALTI POLO GAME.](Karakoram_122.jpg "BALTI POLO GAME."){#b122}
::::

About eight miles below Parkutta the Indus meets one of its greatest confluents,
the river Shyok, which comes down from the Dapsang table-land, gathering in its
course of nearly 400 miles the waters of the numberless glaciers which flow down
the southern slopes of half the Karakoram. As at Dras, the meeting of the waters
takes place at the bottom of a narrow gorge. Oestreich has identified at a
height of from 700 to 1,000 feet above the present level, on the walls of both
valleys, what he considers the remains of level terraces which marked the
confluence of these two rivers at an earlier period.

There are signs which indicate that the Shyok was at one time filled up by a
glacier which projected into the Indus valley, where it formed a barrier some
1,000 feet in height, but did not, however, dam the course of the river. This
phenomenon can be seen to-day in the upper Nubra valley, and we shall find a
most clearly marked example in the case of the Biafo glacier.

The whole of this region is still very little known, and the data we possess
regarding its glacial history, as well as all other questions concerning the
Indus basin, are so incomplete as to be hopelessly insufficient to support any
general theory. As early as 1847 Thomson observed that the lie of the loose
rocks and detritus at the mouth of the gorges and lateral valleys suggested a
glacial origin. Conway identified them more explicitly as loose boulders and
moraine residuum. Oestreich believes that the Indus valley itself was never
occupied by a glacier, but only the tributary valleys.^[^0802]^

In fact, geologists in general seem to hold that the Himalayan region has never
been the scene of periods of  ”Inlandeis” (like Greenland, Kurope and North
America), nor of large ”pedemontane“ glaciers (such as the Malaspina glacier in
Alaska, and the former glaciers on the northern slopes of the Alps); but has
merely witnessed periods of very considerable expansion of the glaciers in the
mountains themselves, such as took place in the valley of the Po, where only the
largest glaciers succeeded in emerging from the valleys as far as the edge of
the plain. Godwin Austen is of this opinion, and cites indications of two
distinct glacial periods, separated by an interval of milder climate. Strachey
and Medlicott hold similar views.^[^0803]^ Ellsworth Huntingdon counts five periods of
moist and cold climate, separated by interglacial epochs of dry and warm
climate, succeeding each other up to a recent period: but he calls the former
periods fluvial instead of glacial, because they are distinguished by increase
in the rivers rather than by any extensive filling up of the valleys by
glaciers.^[^0804]^ R. D. Oldham mentions only three periods of “glacial extension.”^[^0805]^ I
might mention here that Schlagintweit attributes the diminution of the glaciers
to the deep cutting of the valleys and the consequent formation of wide
surfaces, which, when heated by the sun, would give rise to ascending currents
of hot air.^[^0806]^

The volume of the river Indus is nearly doubled by its meeting with the Shyok,
yet owing to the narrowing of the main valley below the meeting-point it seems
hardly increased, as it cannot expand in the narrow gorge, but only runs deeper.
Colonel Montgomerie observed the same lack of apparent increase in the Indus at
its juncture both with the Dras and with the Zaskar near Leh. It was in this
portion of the valley that we found the largest deposits of clay, quite pure or
mingled with a few stones.^[^0807]^ No fossils were found by which it would be possible
to date the deposits.

In the wide bit of valley which follows after the gorges of Shyok lies the oasis
of Gol. We reached it by a long avenue of big willow trees buried half-way up
their trunks in sand. Immediately behind the lines of trees crops had been sown
in the midst of the sand. It seems as though the sprouting wheat must be buried
at the first gust of wind, and one wonders how it can ever reach maturity. This
is possibly a means of winning new soil for cultivation, but it gives the
impression rather of gradual encroachment of the desert on the oasis, such as
occurs in many places in central India.

On May 8th a stage of 21 miles brought us to Skardu. We struck camp at Gol at
half-past three in the morning by moonlight, and were soon on the road. Little
by little the valley grew wider and more open. The path ran along the bottom in
deep sand, where the ponies were a great resource.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Polo at Parkutta.](Karakoram_124.jpg "Polo at Parkutta."){#b124}
::::

About half-way, some 10 miles below Gol, the valley takes a sharp turn to the
south and then bears to the west, becoming wider and wider until it forms a
great plain. This is the table-land of Skardu, about 20 miles long by 5 miles
wide, and covered with sand, which hes in long parallel waves or low dunes as in
great deserts. The Indus winds its tortuous course through the plain between
high banks of sand and deposit.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![A MOSQUE IN THE INDUS VALLEY.](Karakoram_125.jpg "A MOSQUE IN THE INDUS VALLEY."){#b125}
::::

The view over the plain to the far-off chains of mountains on the horizon
appears vast indeed after the long journey between narrow valley walls.
Northward above the spur which divides us from the Shigar valley we catch a
glimpse of the snowy peaks of the Mango Gusor range, 20,633 feet high. Westward
and southward the level sand seems to run to the feet of a great chain of snow
peaks which rise 10,000 feet above the plain.

It is in this plain that the Shigar river, fed by some of the greatest glaciers
in the world, beside numberless smaller ones, meets the Indus. There is much to
interest both geographer and geologist. Oestreich claims that the origin of the
plain is techtonic, and not to be attributed to erosion. On this hypothesis the
basin would be primitive, and by its formation would have determined the course
and the meeting of the Indus and the Shigar.

In the middle of the plain rises a huge round-backed rock, over 1,000 feet high,
which looks like some strange monster crouching upon the sand. On top of it
Colonel Godwin Austen thought that he could detect stratified lake deposits,
which, together with other indications, would go to prove that before the
glacial period the basin was occupied by a lake up to a great height.
Schlagintweit was also of opinion that the sedimentary deposits which are found
at a great height throughout the valley had been formed by an ancient lake.^[^0808]^ As
in the case of the Kashmir basin and other parts of the Indus valley, so also in
the case of the Skardu plain the lacustrian theory has gradually lost ground. On
the other hand, Godwin Austen’s observations as to the undoubted traces of
glacier action over this plain in the remote past have been strengthened and
amplified by all subsequent geologists.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE INDUS ABOVE SKARDU.](Karakoram_126.jpg "THE INDUS ABOVE SKARDU."){#b126}
::::

The displacements and steep angles noticed in the sedimentary strata (Drew), as
well as the rounded surfaces of the rocks protruding above their level, are
attributed to the pressure and friction of glaciers, while the deposits on the
rock of Skardu have been recognized as morenic in character. The early
hypothesis which placed the sources of these glaciers in the mountains to the
south of the plain has been replaced by Lydekker’s theory, derived from the
glacier traces in the Shigar valley and accepted by Conway and Oestreich, to the
effect that a gigantic glacier projected from the mouth of the Shigar valley so
as to cover the whole plain.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BASIN AND ROCK OF SKARDU.](Karakoram_127.jpg "THE BASIN AND ROCK OF SKARDU."){#b127}
::::

Five miles above Skardu, at a point where a projecting spur runs down to the
river, a little fort stands across the path, and we pass through a vaulted
corridor of it, so low as to oblige us to dismount. A little farther on a bend
of the river Indus quite cuts off the way. We have to go down the steep alluvial
bank to the level of the stream, and follow its curve along an avenue of gnarled
and twisted old willows, whence we ascend again to the plain. Here at the top of
the ascent the Duke was received by the Rajah of Skardu and his brothers,
accompanied by a suite of dignitaries, a numerous orchestra and a great crowd.
Salaams were exchanged, and we formed into a long procession, preceded by the
band. With all this pomp we walked for over a mile.
flanked by the crowd on either hand, and at about half-past eleven we reached
the bungalow of the civil engineer, who had put it at the disposal of the Duke
in his absence. The guides were lodged in one of the numerous buildings of the
dak bungalow, a huge place with separate buildings for servants, kitchens, etc.

The wide verandah of the bungalow was quickly turned into a reception room. The
Rajah, the Tehsildar and the chief merchants of Skardu paid ceremonions visits
to the Duke, followed by servants bringing all sorts of delicacies, such as
sweet almonds, dried apricots, raisins, cakes and, above all, a wealth of fresh
vegetables such as we had not seen since we left Srinagar.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE OLD AND THE NEW FORT AT SKARDU.](Karakoram_128.jpg "THE OLD AND THE NEW FORT AT SKARDU."){#b128}
::::

Our own quarters and the neighbouring group of dak bungalows stand to the east
of the town, which stretches between the rock of Skardu and the base of the
mountains, with straggling suburbs scattered through the plain as far as the
villages which lie at the very foot of the mountains.

To the south of Skardu we observed a curious wall stretching across the mouth of
a tributary valley, so perfectly regular as to give the impression of an
artificial dam. It is really a moraine, which closes the entrance into the Sutpa
valley, thus forming a lake three-quarters of a mile long, which Oestreich notes
as the only example in the whole region of a lake of glacial formation.

Upon the detached rock between Skardu and the Indus stands an ancient fort built
about 1610 by Ali Sher, the first of the dynasty of independent Mohammedan
chiefs which came to an end when Ahmed Shah was conquered and dethroned by the
Sikhs in 1840. The fort is now abandoned, and another was built by the Sikhs at
the foot of the rock, on the verge of the plain.

The legend of Alexander the Great, which is so living throughout central Asia,
has penetrated even to this remote spot, and tells us that Skardu is a mere
corruption of Iskandaria, or city of Alexander. The tradition is, however, quite
baseless. It is true that early travellers called the town Iskardo, but
according to Thomson the real Tibetan name is Skardo or Kardo. The Baltis are
unable to pronounce the hard s followed by a consonant at the beginning of a
word, and always prefix an *i* in the case of English words beginning in this
manner,

The place seems to have been far more prosperous and civilized in the past than
at the present day. Thomson, who made a long stay there, spending the whole
winter in 1874, found ruins of buildings constructed of quarried stone, marble
fountains, hanging gardens, aqueducts, etc. Ujfalvy collected ancient household
utensils worked with the finest art. To-day the whole town, with the exception
of a small nucleus, which includes the wretched bazar, lies straggling over the
plain in small groups of huts, forming little islands of cultivation dotted at
random over the desert. There is a great variety of fruit trees, now already
past blossom and covered with leaves, and all! sorts of cereals and vegetables.

The houses are, for the most part, two stories high. The lower story is built of
rough stones and mud, about nine feet high, and is used for stabling and to live
in during the long severe winter. The upper floor is of rough basket-work
plastered over with mud, or even of wood, and is usually smaller than the ground
floor, so as to leave part of the roof of the latter for a terrace, which is
used as a threshing-floor and granary. Skardu has also a small number of houses
inhabited by the upper class, constructed as in other Oriental cities with walls
plastered with lime. They have no windows, and but one door, which leads into
the inner court, upon which the rooms and verandahs open. 
The half-day we spent at Skardu passed very quickly, for we had hard work to do.
First, there was the usual inspection and sorting of baggage, coolies to pay off
and new ones to engage. Next the Duke sent ahead 147 loads to Shigar. Then we
laid in supplies in the bazar —tea and sugar, salt and tobacco, needles and
thread and coloured cotton handkerchiefs, all to be kept for the coolies who
were to be with us in the high region. In the bazar we saw a few stray dogs. In
the other towns of Baltistan we had found none at all, whether from the
Mohammedan dislike of dogs or because the earth supplies food in so niggardly a
measure to man we were unable to make out.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![TYPICAL BALTI HOUSE.](Karakoram_130.jpg "TYPICAL BALTI HOUSE."){#b130}
::::

The Duke made the necessary arrangements to have the meteorological observations
taken in Skardu three times a day through the period of the expedition, and also
organized our postal service. The Government telegraph and post runners do not
go beyond Skardu, but we were to remain in communication with our homes through
special runners engaged by the Duke; they performed their service with
marvellous exactitude up to our very farthest post on the Karakoram glaciers.

At five o'clock we went to see the polo match got up in honour of the Duke. The
polo ground is very large, and lies on a flat natural terrace to the west of the
city, overlooking the great sandy plain and the splendid amphitheatre of snowy
ranges, between which the great Shigar valley cuts a wide trench northward. On
one side is a high covered stand, at the foot of which the orchestra played
incessantly. All round was the festive crowd, diversified by the khaki uniforms
of the soldiers and the white, pink or blue turbans of the important personages
of the place. The polo players were sixteen in number, all dressed in white. The
Rajah was a first-rate horseman, following and hitting the ball very cleverly
with his polo mallet, supported by his own side, with their great white cloaks
fluttering in the sunshine. It was really a fine sight. After the match we went
back to our work, and the polo ground was invaded by boys, who continued the
game on foot, practising hand and eve for the difficult art.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE RAJAH’S POLO TEAM AT SKARDU.](Karakoram_131.jpg "THE RAJAH’S POLO TEAM AT SKARDU."){#b131}
::::

The Duke deposited with a Skardu merchant the portion of our provisions which
would be needed for the return journey. also a considerable bulk of money. It is
a long, tiresome business to count all this small change. In our few free
minutes we wrote letters and telegrams. At about eleven o'clock, after a long
heavy day of more than eighteen hours, we went to bed tired out, but glad to
have got through the first big stage of our journey. We had covered about 225
miles in eleven days among the chains of the western Himalaya.

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0800]: [*Tolti*: refer [Tolti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tolti)]{.footnote}

[^0801]: [Drew quotes an extract from the history of the Emperor Manuel Comnenus, by Johannes Cinnamus, which was communicated to *The Times*  of June 12th, 1874. by an anonymous correspondent, showing that polo was played at Constantinople in the middle of the thirteenth century and that the emperors themselves took part in it. TH. THOMSON (Jour. Roy. Geog. Soc. 19, 1849, p. 25) says that the native name of the game is changau. ROERO DI CORTANZE (op. cit.) calls it *atka*; while according to Ujfalvy *polo* means ball. Vigne has given us one of the best descriptions of the game, while Drew goes minutely into the rules, the dimensions of the ground, the arrangement of the teams, etc.]{.footnote}

[^0802]: [T. THOMSON, *Western Himalaya and Tibet.* London 1852; SIR W. M. CONWAY. op. cit. ; OESTREICH, op. cit.]{.footnote}

[^0803]: [LIEUT.-COL. GODWIN AUSTEN. *Proc. of the Geog. Section of the British Assoc.* (in *Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. N. S. 5*, 1883, p. 610); SIR JOHN STRACHEY, *India.* London 1888; MEDLICOTT and BLANFORD, op. cit.]{.footnote}

[^0804]: [ELLSWORTH HUNTINGTON, *The Vale of Kashmir. Bull. Amer. Geog. Soc. 38, 1896, p. 657 ;* and *The Pulse of Asia.* London 1897.]{.footnote}

[^0805]: [R. D. OLDHAM, *Note on the Glaciation and History of the Sind Valley, Kashmir. Rec Geol Surv. of India,* 31, 1904, p. 142.]{.footnote}

[^0806]: [SCHLAGINTWEIT, *Jour. Asiat. Soc. of Bengal,* 26, 1857.]{.footnote}

[^0807]: [At many points, especially near the river and on expanses of clay recently abandoned by the water, I have noticed that the sand was quite covered with a white efflorescence like hoarfrost. This phenomenon seems widely diffused throughout the region. I met with it in the Shigar and Braldoh valleys. Chemical analysis proves it to be merely carbonate of lime (calcite). THOMSON (op. cit.) collected apparently similar efflorescences in Tibet, on the margins of springs, but there the substance was sesqui-carbonate of soda.]{.footnote}

[^0808]: [LIEUT.-COL. GODWIN AUSTEN, *The Glaciers of the Mustagh Range,  Jour. of the Roy. Geog. Soc.* 34, 1864, p. 19; H. VON SCHLAGINTWEIT, op. cit.]{.footnote}

[^0809]: [*Skardu*: refer [Skardu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skardu)]{.footnote}


