# CHAPTER X<br /> FROM ASKOLEY TO RDOKASS. THE BIAO AND BALTORO GLACIERS. {#ten .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Valley Walled across by the Biafo. — Crossing the Glacier. — The Boulder of
Korophon. — Oscillations in the Volume of the Biafo Glacier from 1861 onwards. —
Inundation of the Braldoh Valley. — Present Condition of the Glaciers in the
Western Himalaya. — The Biaho Valley. — Mango Guser.  — The Ford of the Punmah.—
The New Mustagh. — Deserted Passes. — Bardumal. — First Sight of the Baltoro. —
The Trout of the Biaho. — Paiju. — The Snout of the Baltoro. — Striking Absence
of Frontal Moraine. — Glaciological Notes. — Getting on the Glacier. — The Layer
of Moraine. — Appearance of the Baltoro. — Glacier Lakes and Torrents. — Walls
of the Lower Baltoro. — Paiju Peak. — Machichand Camp. — Marginal Lakes. —
Lihigo Glacier.  — The Mustagh Tower.  —  Second and Third Southern Confluents
 of the Baltoro. — The Gasherbrum Range. — The Buttress of Rdokass. <br /><br />
::::

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_161.jpg ""){#b161}
::::
WE set out from Askoley a little before six o'clock on the morning of May 16th,
very impatient to get at last within sight of the goal we had come so far to
seek. At Srinagar we had taken leave of civilization, and at Skardu of its
slender and far-reaching tentacle, the telegraph wire; but at Askoley we were
cutting ourselves off from human society altogether. at the entrance of the ice
deserts of the Karakoram.

A little above Askoley, where a broad squat tower bears witness to the ancient
strife against the Hunza raiders, we came down into the alluvial bed left dry by
the stream now at low water. Farther on, however. the river flows close round
the foot of a rocky spur, which we were thus forced to cross by a short climb.
The Biafo glacier, lying in
Its deep valley, was not vet visible, but beyond it stretched the range of icy
peaks which form the eastern wall of the Punmah valley, dominated by a
magnificent mountain known to the natives as Paijn. because its other slope
overlooks a camping ground of this name at the foot of the Baltoro glacier.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE FORT AT ASKOLEY.](Karakoram_162.jpg "THE FORT AT ASKOLEY."){#b162}
::::

We now once more made our way across the shingle and pebbles of the valley
bottom, no longer the narrow gorge it was below Askoley, but over a mile wide
and quite level. In less than an hour we stood before the marvellous spectacle
of the Biafo ice stream, over 300 feet high, which, coming down out of a
tributary valley on the right, breaks into the Braldoh valley and appears to cut
it off for its whole width as far as the rocks at the foot of Mango Gusor. The
glacier is covered with a black layer of shingle, showing the clear ice only in
vertical breaks and cracks. In its invasion of the Braldoh valley it has pushed
the river up against the left wall of the valley, while its own emissary, the
Biafo torrent, escapes from its side near the right bank of the valley and meets
the Braldoh farther down. The two rivers and the side of the glacier thus
enclose an irregular sandy delta on the level valley bed, which is dotted with
brushwood, dwarf junipers and willows.^[^1001]^

:::: { .wrap-40 }
![VIEW OF THE BALTORO GLACIER AND PAIJU.](Karakoram_163.jpg "VIEW OF THE BALTORO GLACIER AND PAIJU."){#b163}
::::

We had no difficulty in fording the various branches by which the Biafo torrent
leaves the glacier, to whose immense proportions the volume of water so little
corresponds as to lead us to suspect that its main output must still be through
its snout, where the waters mingle with those of the Braldoh. The side of the
Biafo, which is fringed at intervals of a few yards with small and low moraine
deposits. Is completely covered with stones, in spite of its steepness. From the
top of this lateral wall the surface still rises gradually until about the
muddle of the glacier, where it must be some 400 or 500 feet thick. No longer
compressed within the narrow walls of its native valley, the glacier spreads out
in the shape of a fan, some two miles in width. Our way across, however, was
about twice as long, because the surface was extremely irregular, covered with
fragments of all sorts of rock—granite, quartz. schist, and occasionally
limestone—and we had to take a very winding route. There were few great boulders
and few open crevasses, but there were frequent splits, where one of the margins
has sunk below the other, forming perpendicular steps from a few inches to
several yards in height. The surface melting had not as yet gone very far. There
were only a few pools on the right side of the glacier, a few rivulets and
occasional glacial tables which had not reached any great height. As you look
across the valley from the centre you get the impression that the glacier
actually reaches the rocks of the left valley wall. This was, however, a mile
off, and we could not be certain. A couple of hours brought us on the left side
of the glacier, which is higher and steeper than the right, and descending which
we reached the bottom of the valley. From this point onwards it is known as the
Biaho.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![COOLIES RESTING.](Karakoram_164.jpg "VIEW OF THE BALTORO GLACIER AND PAIJU."){#b164}
::::

A few hundred yards above the glacier hes a gigantic boulder called Korophon, at
whose foot shepherds are accustomed to shelter at night. Here we halted to
examine the snout of the Biafo. From this point it still seems to close the
valley completely, and its thickness appeared to be uniform as far as the eye
could reach. A projection of the glacier, however, prevented our seeing whether
any space is left for the Biaho between the end of the snout and the side of the
valley, or whether the water passes through a tunnel under the glacier. On our
return journey Sella tried to reach the snout of the glacier to make sure
whether the valley is completely cut off or no, but he was prevented by the
lateral torrents, swollen from the summer melting. It was only when, on our
return journey, we ascended the left side of the Braldoh valley on the Skoro La
road that we clearly saw the river flowing under the open sky through a narrow
gap between the valley wall and the steep front of the glacier, The latter
showed no trace of frontal moraine. It is. however, possible that at some point
of the left half of the glacier the ice may bridge over the river and actually
reach the rock.

I have described in detail the position of the Biafo in the summer of 1909,
because it has passed through considerable changes during the last fifty years.
Godwin Austen found it in 1861 filling the valley from one side to the other,
resting its snout on the rocks of Mango Gusor and entirely covering the river.
In 1892 Sir Martin Conway found the snout a quarter of a mile away from the wall
of the valley, and noted that during August it lost another quarter of a mile.
As it withdrew, it left before it a wide moraine covered with earth and
vegetation. This diminution in volume lasted and its rate increased during the
following years, for in 1899 the Workmans found the Biafo so shrunk as barely to
reach the outlet into the Braldoh valley at all. Then a period of increase must
have followed. In 1902, according to Guillarmod, the glacier had again advanced
as far as the right bank of the Braldoh river, driving before it a low frontal
moraine.^[^1002]^ The Workmans, however, on their return to the region in 1908,
noted the Biafo as practically in the same position in which they had found it
in 1899. Therefore, between their two expeditions it must have grown and shrunk
again. Finally, in the year between the last visit of the Workmans and the
Duke's expedition it must evidently have increased again considerably.

It would be strange if during such constant oscillations the Biafo had not at
some time quite dammed up the Biaho river so as to form a lake. As a matter of
fact Godwin Austen found current among the natives of Askoley the legend of such
an accident, occurring perhaps some two centuries earlier. When the pent-up
waters forced their way the devouring flood swept off a village of the Braldoh
valley and carried its mosque entire down to the Shigar river. The sacred
edifice which had performed so miraculous a voyage was rebuilt, piece by piece,
in another village of the Braldoh valley. where it was still to be seen in 1861.

The alternate growth and shrinkage of glaciers at short intervals has been
observed at many other points in this region. For instance, the caravan route
from Leh to Kashgar over the Karakoram pass was obliged to abandon the upper
Shyok valley, which was too often blocked by the glaciers flowing down the
confluent gorges, and to follow a much longer and less direct route. Dr.
Longstaff has collected and compared the existing data and local traditions on
the oscillations of these glaciers, which have more than once dammed the stream
of the Shyok and caused vast disasters.

Observations made on glacial changes are of real practical importance, because
they afford the only possible way of determining changes of climate too slow and
gradual to be studied directly. To establish, however, the behaviour of the
glaciers of any region it is necessary to keep a good number under observation
throughout a period of years, so as to get general results rather than isolated
cases. If we consider the single observations made by travellers, we can only
conclude that in the Himalaya in general and the Karakoram in particular every
glacier appears to obey laws of its own, as we read of some which show all the
signs of rapid shrinkage, others undoubtedly stationary for long periods, and
others which, on equally unexceptionable testimony, are in a period of actual
increase, occasionally so rapid as to sweep away and bury in their irresistible
progress whole fields and cultivated tracts, and to threaten neighbouring
villages with ruin. Behaviour so capricious on the part of phenomena which must
presumably depend upon local conditions common to all, might possibly be
explained by periodic changes of climate following each other at short
intervals, as the time required for masses of snow precipitated in the upper
basins to produce changes in the position of the glacier snouts may vary very
considerably, according to the shape of the basins and the length and slope of
the valleys.

The Geological Office of India undertook in 1905 a series of observations on the
conditions of the glaciers of the western Himalaya, to be repeated at regular
intervals. There is hope that in a few years the work thus done may lead to some
exact conclusions.^[^1003]^ Meantime we may refer to the opinion of Dr. Arthur Neve. who,
after observing a great number of glaciers in the regions round Kashmir at
varying intervals of time, is of opinion that they are, on the whole, in a
period of growth.^[^1004]^ Longstaff also found many glaciers in process of increase in
the valleys of the eastern Karakoram, while the writings of Godwin Austen,
Conway and the Workmans abound in confirmatory examples. It is, nevertheless,
wise to take into account the cases which go to show the contrary—they are not
few in number, and have been observed by the same travellers in the same
regions—and to reserve judgment, contenting ourselves with careful observations
of the appearance and position of the glaciers when occasion offers.

The Biaho valley, wide and with a level bottom, rises gradually and without
sudden breaks eastward to the foot of the Baltoro, about 820 feet higher up. On
leaving Korophon we marched along the bottom of the valley on the right bank of
the stream, admiring as we went the tremendous rock wall of Mango Gusor, formed
of great slabs of absolutely smooth stone which seemed from in front to be
nearly vertical.^[^1005]^ An hour's march brought us to the opening of the tributary
valley of Punmah, and we crossed the sandy delta to the river, some 200 feet
wide and two feet deep, flowing swiftly over a pebbly bed. Our Shikari Abdullah
and two strong coolies saved us from a wetting by carrying us across on their
shoulders. Later in the season the river becomes so much higher as to be no
longer fordable, and the traveller is obliged to ascend the valley to the jhula
bridge suspended across a narrow gorge three miles higher up. We set up our camp
on the alluvial deposit dotted with big stones which fills the angle between the
Punmah and Biaho valleys. Here grows a poor and sparse vegetation of dwarf
juniper, wormwood and astragalus. Mango Gusor from this point looks like a horn
strangely twisted and bossed, covered with snow and ice, rising from wide base
of black rock. The sky was clouded over and the dark atmosphere hid the upper
valley from our view. Luckily the air was calm; wind would have been extremely
obnoxious in this crotch of the valleys where we had raised our tents.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![MANGO GUSOR, FROM THE CONFLUENCE OF THE PUNMAH WITH THE BIAHO.](Karakoram_168.jpg "MANGO GUSOR, FROM THE CONFLUENCE OF THE PUNMAH WITH THE BIAHO."){#b168}
::::

The Punmah valley, which ran up northward in our rear, leads to a vast and
complicated glacier system, across which the peoples on either side of the
Karakoram contrived to find a route by a pass of some 19,000 feet, known as the
New Mustagh, because it was intended to take the place of the old pass of the
same name situated in the northern range of the Baltoro when that became
impassable owing to changes in the glaciers. Now, however, the New Mustagh has
also been given up, either because the raids of the Hunza robbers have given it
ill fame, or else because its glaciers too have become harder to cross.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![AN ALLUVIAL DELTA OF THE BIAHO.](Karakoram_169.jpg "AN ALLUVIAL DELTA OF THE BIAHO."){#b169}
::::

No European has ever crossed the New Mustagh.^[^1000]^ In 1856 Rudolf Schlagintweit tried
the ascent from Askoley, but was driven back by a snowstorm. Godwin Austen had
the same experience in 1861. He met on the glacier four Baltis, who came from
Yarkand, and he says that it would be quite easy to trace a convenient and safe
route across the pass, which is approached on both sides by so easy a slope that
it was formerly used for horses and yaks. Drew gives quite a different account,
stating that the horses had to be hauled up by ropes, and that it took several
men to hoist and support them, so that the pass fell into disuse, and between
1863 and 1870 all communication ceased between Baltistan and Turkestan. The last
to try to reach the New Mustagh was Sir Francis Younghusband, who had reached
Askoley by the older pass of the same name in 1887. His ascent was stopped by
falls of seracs, which seems to prove the truth of the story that the glaciers
had changed. In fact, twenty years previously Godwin Austen had noted that the
Punmah glacier had so far progressed as to cover the path for some distance, and
even the site which had been used for a camping-ground. He also mentions another
important symptom of change in the climate of the region—namely, that at Shigar
from 1849 onward it became impossible to ripen two crops in a season, as had
always been done in the past.

In addition to the two Mustaghs, a number of other passes which used to join
Baltistan with the Hunza-Nagar district, Yarkand, etc., have been so utterly
abandoned that i some cases it is no longer known where they were. The only pass
which still remains open is the Karakoram, much further eastward and coming
under the influence of the arid climate of Tibet, thanks to which it is free
from ice and snow, though nearly 19,000 feet in altitude.

The next day, May 17th, we started off early, because the Duke wanted to camp
that very evening at the foot of the Baltoro. We still had the advantage of the
season of low water, and could march in a straight line over the sand and
pebbles of the river bed, thus saving the long ups and downs of the path which
skirts the flank.^[^1006]^

From Bardumal, a halting-place marked by a boulder considerably smaller than
that of Korophon, we enjoyed a fine view up the Shingkan valley, a tributary on
the left crowned by a group of high snow peaks. Here the Biaho valley, still
running eastward. takes a slight trend to the north, and the river flows around
the foot of the northern wall, so that we had to climb up on the alluvial
terraces. Once we had rounded this barrier, we returned to the bottom of the
valley.

A little farther on our way was cut across by a wide terrace which has driven
the river to the left. This terrace forms a sort of table-land with a rolling
surface, whose transversal ridges are very slightly marked and dotted with
medium-sized boulders mainly composed of granite in various stages of
disintegration and rounded at the corners, mingled with blocks and pebbles of
limestone. The material appears, indeed, to be alluvial deposit ; but the aspect
and shape of the whole formation, running so characteristically across the
valley. is such as to suggest an ancient frontal moraine of the Baltoro, which
now ends five or six miles farther up the valley. Between this terrace, however,
and the glacier lies a long stretch of valley without the smallest trace of
moraine detritus; and so sudden and complete an interruption of the deposits
would be hard to explain. From a little lateral valley, the upper part of which
is filled with a glacier, there runs down to the centre of the terrace a delta
of white stones, probably limestone, standing out clearly against the grey of
the granites. The entire formation might be just the ancient alluvial delta of
this tributary.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BIAHO JUST BELOW THE BALTORO.](Karakoram_171.jpg "THE BIAHO JUST BELOW THE BALTORO."){#b171}
::::

Half way across this terrace we suddenly saw before us the snout of the great
Baltoro glacier, like a huge black monster crouching with flattened back in the
bottom of the valley. Here and there we could discern the gleam of bare ice
showing through some rift in the dark layer of detritus that covers it. There is
no accumulation of moraine before it, only a little moraine ridge clings to the
valley wall, cutting off our view of the right side of the glacier. From this
point Godwin Austen beheld the peak of K^2^ and Guillarmod the Mustagh Tower.
But thick mists filled the high valleys, and we saw no peaks.

Keeping our way along the steep right wall, we now traversed the last stretch of
valley, which here grew wider still, level, sandy and sprinkled with pebbles.
The sand is intersected by a network of rivulets, which bubble up everywhere in
the plain from absolutely pure and limpid springs, delightful to see and
delightful to drink after weeks of filtered or boiled water or tea. In the cold
crystal-clear water swim little mountain trout seven or eight inches long.^[^1007]^
Sella, who was some distance behind, managed to catch a good many of them
without net or hook by striking heavy blows with stones on the rocks under which
they lurk and thus stunning them.

Sheltered at the foot of the last spur which divides it from the Baltoro and
protects it from the icy winds, nesting against the steep right wall of the
valley, lies a little islet of vegetation, a strip of earth covered with long
grass, thick bushes and little willow and rose trees. This is the stage known as
Paiju. There was a time when the Baltis used to come here for a few weeks in
summer to dredge the valley sands for gold which comes, according to Godwin
Austen, from the granites of the Masherbrum. The place was abandoned because the
river changed its course and came to flow along this side of the valley. Ferber
found that the sand does contain gold, but not in sufficient quantity to make
the process remunerative.^[^1008]^

For the last time we set up our camp under the trees, not far from a rough
construction of stones which the Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition had
used as a deposit for provisions. The Baltoro valley opened wide before us.
Against a purple-grey background of relentless mists which concealed the upper
part of the valley stood out upon its right side three groups of rocky peaks,
ending in a host of turrets, pinnacles and needles, strangely wild and menacing
to behold. On the other side is a short chain simpler in form, which just above
the termmation of the Baltoro glacier rises into a peak bristling with sharp
teeth, out of a base covered with snow. This and—Paiju Peak far more important
but invisible from our camp, over which it towers—are the two gate-posts at the
entrance of the fantastic world into which we were about to penetrate. From the
tributary valleys round about us on both sides of the Biaho run down glaciers
broken into icefalls, and black with moraine throughout the lower portion, all
of them terminating at about the same height as the Baltoro.

On the rocks above our camp, which are covered with clay, worn out and furrowed
by water-courses, we counted thirty ibexes. Partridges nest in the bushes just
above the camp. The whole caravan was now united, as the coolies sent ahead from
Askoley had taken three days to do the journey. We formed a community of nearly
400 persons. As night fell the air grew suddenly cold, and soon the whole place
sparkled with little fires, about which moved the dim shadows of the coolies.

May 18th dawned with the usual doubtful and cloudy weather, which seemed to mock
our impatience for a glimpse of the new world before us. The sun rose wearily
through the thick veils of cloud and dense vapour which hung heavily upon the
upper Baltoro. We marched hastily round the foot of the last spur, which was
clothed with moraine up to some 300 feet high. The ice wall of the Baltoro
glacier lies some 300 yards farther on, and in the corner between it and the
spur is a little remnant of moraine about 50 yards away from the glacier.

The river issues from the glacier not in the middle of the front but nearer the
right margin, and out of a tunnel so low that the stream seems to spring between
the glacier and the stony bed of the valley. At the point of issue the front of
the glacier has a deep indentation which divides it into two unequal parts, that
to the right forming a steep wall 300 or 400 feet high, at whose foot we have
just arrived; and a greater lobe to the left, comprising at least
three-quarters of the whole frontage. This main part runs about half a mile
farther down the valley than the right portion, and terminates in a tongue of
ice less steep and less thick, which is divided only by a little moraine from
the snout of another glacier running out towards it from a small tributary
valley on the left.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE SNOUT OF THE BALTORO.](Karakoram_174.jpg "THE SNOUT OF THE BALTORO."){#b174}
::::

Godwin Austen and Conway found the snout of the Baltoro in much the same
condition. Both. however. describe the river as issuing from a veritable tunnel
with a high roof, from the edge of which ice blocks were constantly falling. In
Conway's time the front was divided into three lobes instead of two. Godwin
Austen furthermore mentions a large boulder lying in the middle of the river at
a certain distance from the glacier. This boulder is recognizable in the
illustration in Conway's book as well as in one of the photographs taken by
Sella, which would lead us to suppose that from 1861^[^1009]^ to the present day the
snout of the Baltoro has remained stationary or undergone changes of small
import. I must, however, note that Godwin Austen had the impression from
Conway's photographs that the glacier came down farther in 1892 than in 1861;
while H. F. Montagnier in June, 1903, found the Baltoro pressing with its right
edge against the moraine ridge which I have described, on the wall of the
valley. The latter was rapidly disintegrating and rolling its pebbles down upon
the glacier.^[^1010]^ If so the snout must have retreated about 300 yards
between 1903 and 1909, an insignificant shrinkage in an ice-stream about 36
miles long.^[^1011]^

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE END OF THE GLACIER AND SOURCE OF THE BIAHO TORRENT.](Karakoram_175.jpg "THE END OF THE GLACIER AND SOURCE OF THE BIAHO TORRENT."){#b175}
::::

The front throughout its whole extent is formed of live ice down to the bottom,
without any fringe of moraine. At the foot of the wall there are merely a few
scattered blocks of medium size, and a little farther down no trace of moraine
detritus is to be found on the level alluvial valley bottom. This entire absence
of frontal moraine material in a glacier so vast and so entirely covered by a
thick layer of moraine material, whose snout seems to have remained about in the
same place for the last fifty years, is certainly amazing. The Workmans have
observed the same absence of frontal moraine in several of the great glaciers
explored by them, while sometimes others quite close to them would have their
whole frontage covered with high and thick moraines. Our theories as to the
formation of frontal moraines afford no convincing explanation of this strange
phenomenon.^[^1012]^ We are thus obliged to fall back upon other considerations
suggested by the condition of the particular glacier basins where the phenomenon
in question is displayed.

The characteristic absence of frontal moraine has been most especially observed
in the largest glaciers, such as the Siachen, Biafo, Hispar, Baltoro and Chogo
Lungma, which, with the exception of the last. are all over 30 miles long and
occupy wide valleys with very slight inclination, so that their progress must be
determined rather by pressure of the ice masses coming down from the upper
basins than by their own plasticity and weight. The absence of frontal moraine
can be explained only by the immobility of the terminal portion of these
glaciers, which has turned into dead or stagnant ice, and may be considered,
geologically speaking, in every respect as rock. The snouts of these huge ice
rivers would thus stand for an ancient phase of development. They are, as it
were, the fossils of a previous glacial period. To this a period of suspended
advance must have succeeded, or even a shrinkage of the upper portion of the
glacier, leaving this extreme end where it stood. This presumable immobility of
the snout by no means excludes the possibility of a fresh period of activity
following after, such as may possibly to-day be found going on in the upper part
of the Baltoro. The glacier in its new activity might flow for a longer or
shorter distance over the dead ice, which forms its bed just as the bottom of
the valley would. If the pressure became sufficient it might even revive the
whole mass and drive it farther down the valley. Such would seem to have been
the ease in the recent oscillations of the snout of the Biafo which I have
mentioned above.

The recent slight displacements in the snout of the Baltoro, which seem quite
established when we compare our own observations with the descriptions of our
predecessors, do not actually contradict this theory. It is quite conceivable
that the bulk of dead ice may have been pushed forward by pressure from the rear
without changing its condition of intrinsic immobility—that is to say, without
any flow of ice caused by its own plasticity, the only form of motion which
could cause an active and continuous carriage of material from the high valley
to the front of the glacier. It may be that the Baltoro is again preparing for a
period of activity in the more or less remote future. As a matter of fact,
especially on our return journey in the beginning of August, we noted for some
miles through the lower portion of the glacier great waves rather deeply marked,
whose direction was mainly transversal, whereas higher up the ridges and hollows
ran lengthwise. This transversal undulation of the glacier might be the result
of immense pressure exercised by the volume of confluent glaciers in a state of
active increase,

The formation of dead ice either separate from or else more or less closely
related to the original glacier is a phenomenon long familiar to students of
glaciology. Examples of it on a much smaller scale may be found in our own Alps.
The above considerations, which have been suggested to me by Ingegnere Vittorio
Novarese, of the Regio Ufficio Geologico, I have dwelt upon at some length in
the hope of drawing the attention of travellers to a state of things which, if
confirmed by further observations, would bring about results of real importance
to the study of glaciology.^[^1013]^

The end of the Baltoro is about 11,000 feet above sea level, some 820 feet above
the end of the Biafo. Of the other great glaciers of the Karakoram. the Siachen
ends at an altitude of 11.600 feet (Longstaff, 1909), the Hispar at 10,803 feet
(Workman, 1908), and the Chogo Lungma, the lowest of all, at 9,519 feet
(Workman, 1902).

The wall of the glacier facing us was cut obliquely by a sort of narrow ledge,
overhung by big blocks of rock poised—it would be hard to say how—upon the
declivity. This ledge forms the way of access to the top of the glacier. On the
previous evening at Paiju it had seemed settled, after endless discussion, that
the coolies would cover in two days instead of three the whole of the distance
to Rdokass. the southern spur of the Baltoro, which, judging from Guillarmod’s
account, seemed to be the most suitable position for our base camp. This
morning, however, the rumour was afloat that the coolies were making pretexts
for delay in order to force us to set up camp at Liligo, a third of the whole
distance. The Duke met this by waiting at the foot of the glacier 
until nearly all of the 260 coolies had started off; it took about an hour.
Twenty minutes after we were on the Baltoro.

The top of the slope was covered by big blocks of granite, so light in colour as
hardly to be distinguishable from the pieces of marble mingled with them. We
turned toward the left or southern side of the valley, cutting across the
glacier in an oblique line just above the outlet of the stream. Here the laver
of moraine was without any trace of arrangement into stripes, and composed of
widely-contrasted materials—granites of every conceivable quality, quartzites,
schists, slates, marbles, many-coloured conglomerates and silicacious rocks of
dark red and purple shades. Nearer the left bank the moraine was almost entirely
composed of dark grey granite, broken up into regular fragments. The biggest
blocks measured some 15 or 20 feet in their largest measurement, grading down
from these to the smallest gravel. Real sand was rare. The surface is irregular;
we could make out no ridges or troughs arranged according to any general
orientation. Yet this lower portion of the glacier is less unequal and broken
than the Biafo. We found it much harder to traverse on our return journey two
months later. There were occasional little plants here and there among the
stones, and even a few small shrubs; but the vegetation was so rare and isolated
that it seemed impossible it could give rise to real thickets on the moraine
later in the season. As we went higher, close to the left bank of the glacier,
the inequalities of the surface became more pronounced, until the whole looked
as though it had suffered some huge convulsion. It was distorted into deep
valleys and irregular holes among hills and ridges and steep slopes running in
every direction. Wherever the surface was not absolutely vertical these were
covered with sharp and insecure detritus stones that threatened sprains and
bruises at every step. The Duke walked ahead with our two guides who determined
our route through the labyrinth. They set up cairns on the larger rocks to
indicate the tortuous path to us coming after.

Before we had gone far on our way up and down across the ridges, skirting the
big hummocks and deep hollows, we began to feel the weariness well-known to all
those who have marched on moraines. And this was the very outset of a long
journey. On every side our view was cut off by steeps of ice and stony slopes,
the guides naturally preferring to follow the valleys and skirt the base of the
ridges. Whenever the caprice of our obstacles obliged us to climb over some
higher ridge the gigantic bulk of the Baltoro offered us the same uniform view,
of an unbounded desert covered with masses of detritus, with here and there a
gleam of black or bluish ice laid bare by a fissure.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![SURFACE LAKE ON THE LOWER BALTORO.](Karakoram_179.jpg "SURFACE LAKE ON THE LOWER BALTORO."){#b179}
::::

The air was heavy and close, though here, as on the Biafo, the melting had
scarcely begun. Only here and there did we encounter a small rivulet or glacial
pool; yet the water has no channel through the depth of the glacier, there are
no open crevasses and none of the glacier moulins, those characteristic wells so
common in our own glaciers below the snow line, by which the water produced by
surface melting disappears into the depths. We found signs of running waters,
however, in the shape of round worn pebbles of typical alluvial appearance.
mingled in small numbers with the sharp-cornered moraine fragments. The glacier
fills the valley from side to side, forming a V-shaped trough between its steep
side and the rocks of the valley wall. On the maps of Conway and Guillarmod a
torrent runs through this deep trough, but it did not appear to be flowing as
yet. No tributary glacier flows into the Baltoro from the south side, by which
we were ascending it, for the first four miles of the lower course.^[^1014]^ But on the
other side of the valley there flows into the Baltoro a few hundred yards above
its end a large confluent bare of moraine, which, like a stream in flood over
flowing the surface of the river it enters, overrides the Baltoro for a long
distance with its dazzling white torrent of séracs. Between two and three miles
farther up a second tributary valley opens on the same side, as deep and level
as the first in its lower course, but much wider. Out of this, too, flows a
glacier with a wide medial moraine, and overtops the margin of the Baltoro with
a high front of séracs. These valleys are separated from each other by the rocky
spurs which we had already admired from Paiju, and which from near at hand
appear even more inaccessible. They form a wild architecture of their own, a
maze of turrets, pinnacles, needles, reaching up to a height of some 1,000 feet
and so precipitous that they scarcely leave the perpendicular from top to
bottom. They remind one of the dolomite towers, but it was difficult from this
distance to recognize the true nature of the formation. To the west of these we
saw Paiju Peak, a pile of triangular rock pyramids rising one above another,
clearly outlined by their ice ridges and lifting up a symmetrical pointed summit
completely covered with snow.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![THE ULI BIAHO GLACIER JOINING THE BALTORO.](Karakoram_180.jpg "THE ULI BIAHO GLACIER JOINING THE BALTORO."){#b180}
::::


About half-past nine we reached a point opposite a little gorge opening out in
the left wall of the valley, in such a way as to leave free a small space at the
bottom of the gully between the glacier and the rock. This was the stage known
as Liligo. Here the coolies crowded round us, trying to induce us to stop,
though it was still quite early. We had no great difficulty in persuading them
to go on for another hour, when we reached another couloir in the wall almost
exactly similar to the first. Here the guides quickly cut steps in the steep
side of the glacier, which was some 200 feet high, and we descended to a sort of
oval well, quite level, some 60 yards wide by 150 or 200 yards long, and strewn
with stones.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE STONY WASTE OF THE LOWER BALTORO.](Karakoram_181.jpg "THE STONY WASTE OF THE LOWER BALTORO."){#b181}
::::

This place is known to the Baltis as Machichand. There was nothing to show that
the little hollow had ever been occupied by a lake. Numerous smooth pebbles
pointed rather to its being occasionally the bed of a torrent. On one side it is
bounded by the flank of the Baltoro, an ice wall black with detritus, down which
ran a thousand small streams, ceaselessly whirling along stones to the gully
below, where the ice met the bottom of the valley and a little brook flowed. On
the other side the valley wall rises steeply, cut in the centre by a ravine. It
is a great wall of loose conglomerate, from 400 to 500 feet high, with a clayey
top eaten out and carved by the waters into deep vertical furrows and fringes,
forming a long row of tall pillars, each of which Is crowned by a rock or
boulder resting on it like a mushroom on its stalk.

:::: { .wrap-60 .break-after }
![PAIJU PEAK.](Karakoram_182.jpg "PAIJU PEAK."){#b182}
::::

:::: { .wrap-100.break-after }
![Paiju and the Towers on the north of the Baltoro.](Karakoram_183.jpg "Paiju and the Towers on the north of the Baltoro."){#b183}
::::

They looked extremely unstable, and if it had come on to rain our camping ground
would have proved very undesirable. At either end this oval space was blocked by
the meeting of the glacier with the wall. At the upper end a narrow corridor
remains free at the bottom of the gorge; at the lower the glacier abuts on the
rock. The section of the glacier seen thus from the side shows plainly in its
whole length the arrangement of the ice in two horizontal strata of nearly equal
thickness, coming together along a regular line, separated only by a thin layer
of detritus which makes the formation quite evident.^[^1015]^ If we admit the hypothesis
of the immobility of the snout of the Baltoro, the upper layer may be supposed
to represent the active glacier and the lower the motionless mass.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE CAMP AT MACHICHAND, LOOKING UP THE VALLEY.](Karakoram_183a.jpg "THE CAMP AT MACHICHAND, LOOKING UP THE VALLEY."){#b183a}
::::

We cleared away the detritus a little in the centre of the oval space and set up
our tents. The coolies arrived in camp not by twos and threes as usual, but in
numerous bands, after a very cautious descent down the steps in the ice. The
fact is they are afraid of the glacier, especially of being alone upon it, to
avoid which their had finished their short but hard stage at unaccustomed speed.
They laid down their loads and scattered up the valley slope to hunt for
firewood. They found a few gnarled trunks of dead juniper, and these they rolled
down to the camping place.^[^1016]^  A great rock rolled down into the bargain, and it
was a real miracle that it did not crush any of the coolies below. They lighted
their fires along the wall, where they made their bivouac ut the greatest
possible distance from the glacier. Down the latter at very brief intervals
stones and boulders came crashing with loud reports, followed by a trail of
small detritus that slid down the ice with a prolonged crackling sound. All this
fell at the foot of the slope without danger to us, but the coolies were uneasy
and kept looking at the glacier as though they had an obscure consciousness of
the life animating the huge mass. It is so seemingly inert, yet within so full
of motion and ceaseless transformation, that one gets an impression as of
something furtive and insidious, like a monster crouching. One single raven kept
watch over our camp the whole day, perched on a near-by projection and following
all our movements with the closest attention.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE CAMP, LOOKING DOWN THE VALLEY.](Karakoram_184.jpg "THE CAMP, LOOKING DOWN THE VALLEY."){#b184}
::::

With the cool of the evening the atmosphere gradually cleared, but from the
bottom of the hole where we were we could only get glimpses through the openings
between ice and mountain side. Night came swiftly, almost without twilight. The
stones fell at longer intervals from the glacier; the rivulets froze over and
stopped flowing. Soon the silence was unbroken, except by the coolies, who
squatted and murmured as usual round the fires that lighted with strange gleams
the walls of our prison

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![A GLACIAL LAKE OF THE LOWER BALTORO.](Karakoram_185.jpg "A GLACIAL LAKE OF THE LOWER BALTORO."){#b185}
::::

On the following morning Abdullah, instead of bringing us up to the glacier
again, took us along the narrow ravine between it and the valley wall, which is
exposed in many places to danger from falling stones. Wherever the glacier
abutted against the rock we climbed over it, always redescending as soon as
possible into the ditch. In this way we had but brief glimpses of the valley or
of its clear little lakes. whose limpid emerald-green waters are never clouded
by the continually dropping stones. They are surrounded by high ice-banks
hanging down in dazzling white stalactites and undermined by melting. The
turrets of the northern valley wall made a wonderful background for the scene.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![THE LILIGO GLACIER.](Karakoram_186.jpg "THE LILIGO GLACIER."){#b186}
::::

After over an hour's march we reached a marginal lake some 200 yards long and
from 5 to 10 yards wide, which fills up the gap between the glacier and the
rock. It appeared to be confined by an ice-dam of no great thickness or
strength. If this slight barrier had given way before the pressure of the waters
or the motion of the glacier our camping ground of the might before would have
proved a dangerous one indeed. It is certainly far more prudent to encamp upon
the glacier rather than in these lateral ravines. The Workmans upon the Hispar
witnessed more than one vast and violent flood caused by the breaking of glacial
reservoirs; and Longstaff came near losing his camp by the same cause on the
margin of the Rgyong glacier.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![First Camp on the Baltoro, between Liligo and Rhobutse.](Karakoram_187.jpg "First Camp on the Baltoro, between Liligo and Rhobutse."){#b187}
::::

Another half-hour's march brought us to the mouth of the first tributary valley
on the southern side, smaller than those which open on the northern side and
filled up by the Liligo glacier. The latter is very broken, without surface
moraine, and barely occupies the centre of its valley. It stops about a third of
a mile from the edge of the Baltoro, with a steep front about 300 feet high,
without any detritus at its foot. Without counting the little hanging glaciers
of the smaller gullies, the Liligo and one other glacier near the junction of
the Baltoro with the Godwin Austen are the only tributaries which do not
actually flow into the mass of the Baltoro. The Liligo valley slopes up gently
from the Baltoro to the foot of a rocky height, whose structure in tiers of
pyramids reminds us of Paiju Peak, though it is far less imposing. The valley
then bends eastward and is lost to view. The space between the snout of the
Liligo and the side wall of the Baltoro is partly taken up by a little lake,
above which is a second and smaller one. Later in the season the two lakes flow
into one and fill up the whole mouth of the tributary valley. Near them a small
level was pointed out to us beside the Baltoro as the camping ground called
Rhobutse.

We were now marching upon the glacier again, but so near to the left margin that
we were able to see nothing of the high valley, partly because it changes its
north-easterly direction a little farther up and takes a turn due east. At this
point our attention was chiefly concentrated upon a group of rocky peaks of the
northern chain. Among them, as we knew, is the Mustagh Tower,^[^1017]^ but it was as yet
still hidden among the minor peaks, and only much later were its noble outlines
revealed to us.

The distance between the Liligo glacier and the second confluent on the left is
certainly greater than appears on the maps of Conway and Guillarmod (just over
one mile). At least we took more than an hour and a half to cover it. This
second tributary is nameless, although its dimensions are by no means
insignificant. It flows down from a peak of dazzling whiteness, loaded with snow
despite the steepness of the slope, and it flows for a long way on top of the
Baltoro, so that our route cut straight across it. It is almost level, without
crevasses, and dotted with single blocks and a little small detritus. Here and
there were groups of ice-tables and numerous ice-cones, the pedestals of old
fallen tables. There were none of these upon the lower Baltoro, where the
uninterrupted layer of detritus causes uniform fusion of the whole surface.

We now crossed the next spur, skirting its slope along a stretch of track, which
was a real rest after the long march across the moraine. Thence we reached the
third tributary on this side of the valley, which, like the last, has no name,
and flows over the surface of the Baltoro for 2 considerable distance. We had
nearly reached the centre of this glacier when the upper part of the Baltoro
valley finally unfolded itself to our view, as far as the distant chain
containing the marvellous and symmetrical peak of Gasherbrum^IV^, 26,000 feet
high. To its right a slender and more distant peak is just visible, quite
covered with snow. This must be Gasherbrum^III^, just little higher than
Gasherbrum^IV^ (26,090 feet).

This third southern confluent opens into the valley opposite the spur which
separates the third from the fourth northern confluent, or the Dunge glacier
from the Biale glacier, to use Guillarmod’s nomenclature. But on Guillarmod’s as
well as on Conway’s map the valley mouth is placed a little below that of the
Dunge glacier, in such a position that it would be impossible to the from this
point the chain of the Gasherbrums.^[^1019]^ In reality the mouth of the valley lies much
nearer the point where the Baltoro valley turns castward, and to the promontory
of Rdokass, which one reaches from it in only three-quarters of an hour, with a
short crossing under the mountain side and skirting a recess filled with a large
nevé, from which one passes directly on to the spur of Rdokass.^[^1018]^ Our feet were
bruised and sore from the long march over hard moraine, and it was a great
relief to walk on the soft earth covered with elastic grass. The coolies were
not far behind, and were nearly all in camp an hour after our arrival. They did
not appear to be tired, and were quite in their usual good humour, which turned
to noisy joy when the Duke added to the usual daily ration of meal a present of
tobacco, tea and sugar.

:::: { .wrap-70 .break-before }
![The Baltoro.](Karakoram_188.jpg "The Baltoro."){#b188}
::::

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1000]: [*New Mustagh*: refer [Mustagh Pass](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mustagh_Pass)]{.footnote}

[^1001]: [The terminal snout of the Biafo and the delta between the two rivers are clearly visible in the panorama reproduced opposite p. 158.]{.footnote}

[^1002]: [DR. PFANNL does not mention this frontal moraine, and describes the Biafo as a mass of ice 600 or 700 feet thick, protruding across the valley, squeezing the Braldoh into a narrow bed and ending with a steep snout 400 feet above the river. This description agrees with our observations made in 1909 (see *Mitt. d. Geog. Ges. Wien,* 47, 1904, p. 255).]{.footnote}

[^1003]: [See H. H. HAYDEN, *Notes on Certain Glaciers in N.W. Kashmir:* and *Survey of Glaciers in N.W. Himalaya. Rec, Geol. Surv. of India,* 35, 1907, p. 123; T. H. HOLLAND, *Glacier Movements in the Himalayas. Geog. Jour.* 31, 1908, p. 315.]{.footnote}

[^1004]: [A. NEVE, *Rapid Glacial Advance in the Hindu Kush. Alp. Jour. 23,* 1907, p. 400.]{.footnote}

[^1005]: [On the northern slope of Mango Gusor, more than 3,000 feet above the bottom of the valley, Sir W. M. Conway found the imprint of a colossal glacier which must at one time have filled it.]{.footnote}

[^1006]: [Guillarmod relates that he and the rest of the expedition of which he was a member began between Korophon and Bardumal to note the first symptoms of fatigue due to altitude, although they had stopped at Askoley for eight days in order to rest and accustom themselves to the thin air of 10,000 feet. Our own experience was quite different. Not one of us thirteen Europeans was conscious of the least indisposition, and we reached the Baltoro glacier with a sense of absolute well-being and in full enjoyment of our strength, which had been developed by gradual and continuous training. We had not the slightest need or wish to interrupt our march.]{.footnote}

[^1007]: [This species of trout *(T. Himalayana)* appears to be the sole inhabitant of the streams of the upper Himalaya. Cunningham caught some that were over 15 inches long in the torrents of Ladakh, about 15,000 feet high. Vigne, too, says it is the only fish inhabiting the Indus al Skardu.]{.footnote}

[^1008]: [A. C. FERBER, *An Exploration of the Mustagh Pass in the Karakoram Himalayas. Geog. Jour. 30, 1907,* p. 630.]{.footnote}

[^1009]: [See report of discussion after the lecture of SIR W. M. CONWAY at the Roy. Geog. Soc., in *Geog. Jour. 2,* 1893, p. 301.]{.footnote}

[^1010]: [Verbal communication made to me by M. Montagnier in London, Dec. 1910.]{.footnote}

[^1011]: [Guillarmod’s book does not give any exact data as to the look of the front of the Baltoro in 1902. The article of Dr. Prannu in *Zeit. d. deut. u. oest. Alpenver.* 35, 1904, p. 96, contains an illustration showing the mouth of the Biafo river and the snout of the glacier, where they seem to have the same appearance and character as that noted by us in 1909.]{.footnote}

[^1012]: [See on this point the discussion which took place at the English Royal Geog. Soe. after the lecture of Dr. WORKMAN : *From Srinagar to the Sources of the Chogo Lungma, Geog. Jour.* 25, 1905, p. 245; and the comments of the same author in *Exploration of the Nun Kun Mountain Group, etc. Geog. Jour.* 31, 1908, pp. 34-35.]{.footnote}

[^1013]: [These considerations, based upon the glaciological observations of the expedition, were the subject of a communication by Ing. Novarese to the Ital. Geolog. Soc. (summer meeting, Sept. 1911).]{.footnote}

[^1014]: [The map of the Baltoro contained in this volume shows only the upper two-thirds of the glacier, which the reader must imagine to be prolonged for 10 miles more toward the west. The little panorama which is here reproduced, together with the left half of panorama B, must make up for the lack of the map.]{.footnote}

[^1015]: [This arrangement is plainly visible in the illustrations here given.]{.footnote}

[^1016]: [Guillarmod noticed similar trunks of old juniper upon the slopes above Liligo, and the Workmans saw along the sides of the Chogo Lungma valley dead tree trunks considerably larger than any of the living trees. These too are symptomatic of a change of climate.]{.footnote}

[^1017]: [*Mustagh Tower*: refer [Muztagh Tower](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muztagh_Tower)]{.footnote}

[^1018]: [In Conway's and Guillarmod’s maps the distance between Rdokass and the third left-hand tributary is over three miles, which on such a surface as that of the Baltoro would certainly take at least two hours’ march. FERBER had already (op. cit.) noted this discrepancy between the southern and northern sides of the Baltoro in Conway’s map. For the rest it is a fairly accurate map, and a truly remarkable piece of work to have been produced by a short month’s work on the Baltoro, and considering that it represents only a part of the vast glacial system explored by Conway in a single campaign.]{.footnote}

[^1019]: [*Gasherbrum*: refer [Gasherbrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gasherbrum)]{.footnote}
