# CHAPTER XII.<br /> FROM RDOKASS TO THE CONCORDIA AMPHITHEATRE. {#twelve .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Map and Panoramas of the Expedition. — We leave Rdokass. — Glacier Tables. — The
Median Moraine of the Baltoro. — The Workman Theory of Glacial Ridges. — Changes
of Nomenclature. — Ice-cones and Pyramids. — Their Origin. — Glacier Lakes and
Reservoirs. — Camping on the Glacier. — Conway’s Crystal Peak. — The Doksam
Glacier. — The Marble Peak. — Godwin Austen Glacier. — In Sight of K^2^. <br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_204.jpg ""){#b204}
::::
FROM this point forward the narrative may be supplemented by the map of the
expedition comprising the two upper thirds of the Baltoro and its formation
basin, drawn to the scale of But no description, even with the assistance of
photography, can succeed, I fear, In giving a just conception, even at a faint
one, of this extra- ordinary region. To compose the picture as far as may be,
the reader must tax his patience to make a careful study of Sella’s panoramas,
which were taken from many points, and compare them with one another and with
the map. It is in order to make this possible that not only the topographical
stations, but also the points from which the photographs were taken, are marked
upon the triangulation map, and the panoramas provided with the nomenclature and
altitudes of the different peaks. In addition, the points from which other
panoramas were taken are marked with a small cross so as to make comparison
easy. The illustrations in the text and the plates are intended to give special
details from the panoramas. I hope that the frequently recurring references to
the latter may he justified by this explanation.

On the morning of May 23rd at about eight o’clock, after a little hesitation
owing to the uncertain look of the weather, we placed our trust in the stability
of the barometer and in the wind, which seemed to be veering from south-west to
north-east, and we all set out from Rdokass, leaving only the shepherds, a
couple of chuprassis and a few coolies in Mr. Baines’ service. The Duke’s plan
was to follow the return route of the Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod
expedition—that is, to cut across the Baltoro toward a camping ground at the
foot of the northern slope, a little above Younghusband glacier, where Conway
had made his Storage Camp. We skirted the Rdokass ridge downward, and crossed
the left hand moraine, which consists of good-sized granite blocks, and comes
from the united marginal moraines of the Yermanendu and Mundu glaciers, two
affluents much larger than any on the northern side, which flow down from the
Masherbrum group, separated by a long and low spur. We then went a long way up
the Baltoro between the central and the left-hand lateral moraine. Here the
surface was comparatively smooth and the detritus of granite and schist rather
fine, so that the marching was not very fatiguing. This part of the glacier is
dotted with ice-tables, none of them very large or high, and mingled, as usual,
with cones and broken columns of former tables. The tops of these latter had
fallen off, and were lying on the surface of the glacier. where, by sheltering
another small extent of ice from the rays of the sun while the surrounding level
sunk by melting, they would in time form new tables, the process repeating
itself indefinitely. After an hour’s march we stopped to distribute smoked
spectacles to the coolies, for there was a great deal of fresh snow among the
stones. and the reverberation was trying, in spite of the cloudy sky.

We were now drawing nearer the median moraine, which rises abruptly to a height
of 100 to 200 feet, or even more, above the level of the glacier. We finally
climbed on top of it, and found ourselves amid rugged and broken ice covered
with all sorts of minerals, mainly limestones and polychrome conglomerates. The
extraordinary irregularity of the surface contrasts curiously with the gentle
slopes and the structural lines of the valley. We were, above all, struck by the
absence of crevasses, a state of things to be explained only by a level valley
bottom, unbroken by abrupt falls or projections. But what can then be the origin
of this labyrinth of heights and hollows? What are the forces which have heaved
up the glacier into high cones, into curving waves or vertical steps, with every
appearance of a surface shaped by fracture? Freshfield attributes the
irregularity of surface in the Zemu glacier of the Kinchinjunga group to the
action of the surface streams, which have furrowed and carved out the glacier in
every direction. At first sight, it does not seem possible that confusion and
irregularity on such a vast scale as here could be produced by the action of
such simple forces, even taken together with unevenness of surface melting,
which would be brought about more actively where the layer of detritus was thin,
and more slowly where it lay thick enough to protect the ice from the sun. The
Workmans noticed that the ridges and valleys on the Hispar were most pronounced
where some big confluent joined the glacier and pressed upon it from above with
the enormous weight of its own moving mass, in some cases even driving the main
stream toward the other side of the valley. They advanced the hypothesis that
the surface upheavals are caused by this pressure, which thus forms veritable
folds in the plastic mass of the glacier. The theory is ingenious, and appears
the more probable in that many indications in the Baltoro glacier seem at first
sight to confirm it. Upon this hypothesis the long high spinal vertebra of the
Baltoro would be formed by the pressure in opposite directions exerted by the
Godwin Austen and the upper Baltoro, where they meet in the Concordia
amphitheatre, a pressure increased by the confinement of their united mass
within the limits of the Baltoro valley, and still further by the force of
confluent glaciers running into it perpendicular to its axis from the high
mountains on either side.

[Panorama Q](https://flic.kr/p/2niGATU) gives a long stretch of this central
upheaval of the Baltoro, showing Low it starts abruptly from the surface of the
glacier and how its walls are cut into vertical sections, apparently due to
fracture produced by pressure too great for the elasticity of the glacier. The
look of the ice recalls, though on a smaller scale, the great dykes caused by
pressure in the polar ice-pack, where an analogous process goes on. Conway, too,
attributes the long undulations of the Baltoro to pressure brought about by its
confinement in the narrow parts of the valley. Notwithstanding all this, when
two months later we again traversed the glacier on our return and saw the
extraordinary changes a few weeks had been able to effect in digging out fresh
valleys and vastly increasing the differences of level, we were forced to own
that uneven surface melting, due to the varying thickness of the moraine layer,
is without doubt the main factor in the irregularity of the glacier surface. It
is also possible that the pressure of the glaciers against each other does bring
about some upheavals and projections of the mass, and that these, in their turn,
by determining certain falls and displacements of detritus, add to the
irregularity of the melting process and so contribute to the general result.

We had now nearly reached the mouth of the Younghusband glacier, at about the
point attained by Godwin Austen in 1861.^[^1200]^ Although we had passed the spot where
we had intended to camp, Abdullah and the native guides kept on up the glacier
instead of crossing it direct to the northern side. After long explanations we
succeeded in making out that the coolies put the stage of Goré above the
confluence of the Younghusband glacier, where Guillarmod’s map has Biange, a
mere inversion of names. It was obviously wise to profit by the goodwill of the
porters and make the camp as far up as possible. We therefore allowed ourselves
to be led without further discussion. The coolies were being paid per stage
(*parao*) at the exceptional tariff of seven annas, and not by the day, so it
was to their interest to march quickly and cover two or more stages in a day.

Inconsistencies in nomenclature are, to my mind, far less surprising in this
region than the fact that there are any names at all, implying a certain
familiarity with places which the natives must never have visited voluntarily,
if one judged by their violent aversion to the glacier, which is certainly
strong enough to counterbalance any natural curiosity. Yet there are other
indications which seem to show that they have some degree of acquaintance with
these ice-bound solitudes. As early as 1892, at the time of Conway’s visit, a
Balti of Askoley made on the sand a rough sketch of the district in order to
show Eckenstein the position of the Mustagh passes, the Baltoro, the Mustagh
Tower, Masherbrum, Gasherbrum and K^2^.^[^1201]^

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![ICE PYRAMID ON THE BALTORO.](Karakoram_208.jpg "ICE PYRAMID ON THE BALTORO."){#b208}
::::

From Rdokass on we observed, as did our predecessors, some higher hummocks or
pointed cones far too large and broad-based to be identified with the pedestals
of fallen glacier tables. Little by little as we went up these strange
formations became more numerous, and increased in height up to from 30 to 70
feet or more. They are in shape either cones with an oval base or flattened
pyramids, whose greatest diameter runs parallel to the direction of the valley.
They usually terminate in a sharp point. On the right side of the glacier, to
which we had now crossed, we found them large and imposing and arranged in rows
running in the direction of the moraine. As you go farther down they get farther
apart, but remain between the same moraine lines. The glacier marked with these
snow-white pinnacles over a dark background of moraine presents an odd
appearance—like a graveyard with rows of tombstones, or a river dotted with
fleets of white lateen sails.

The first observer to call attention to these ice pyramids was Godwin Austen,
whom nothing noteworthy escaped. Guillarmod supposes them to be séracs fallen
from overhanging side glaciers, and reduced to this shape by melting. Ferber
notes the phenomenon without attempting an explanation. They seem to be peculiar
to the Baltoro—at least, the ice cones and pyramids seen by the Workmans on the
Hispar and by Longstaff on the Siachen, and the glaciers which cutt into the upper
Shyok valley, appear to be merely supports of fallen tables. In any case, we
have no detailed descriptions which would suffice to identify them with the
pyramids of the Baltoro.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![ICE PYRAMIDS.](Karakoram_209.jpg "ICE PYRAMIDS."){#b209}
::::

These formations we observed only as far as the entrance to the Concordia basin.
We saw none of them on the higher portion of the glacier. where the action of
melting is equally intense. But in the Concordia amphitheatre and on the upper
Baltoro we saw formations which might account for the origin of the pyramids. I
mean the long high dykes of ice which rise between the dark moraine ridges
hollowed by melting. They are generally bare of detritus, possibly owing to the
steepness of their sides, and stand out sharply from the moraine-covered surface
as if the live ice had violently thrust itself up through the shroud of
detritus. Panoramas [K]](https://flic.kr/p/2niyD77) and
[N](https://flic.kr/p/2niE5ds) show some of these icy crests. Here and there
they appear already divided into segments and separated blocks, in consequence
of the melting of the intermediate parts due to patches of detritus. Godwin
Austen observed on the Baltoro itself, in addition to the pyramids, certain
oblong blocks with a sharp ridge on top, which must have been larger sections of
one of these ice dykes. In this part of the Baltoro, between the ranks of
pyramids, are numerous exquisite little lakes, mere collections of water n
hollows, not fed by streams or provided with outlets.  Some of them are covered
with ice vaults, recalling similar formations on the Agassiz glacier in Alaska.
The ice pyramids posed on the margin of these little lakes are dazzlingly
reflected in the translucent water; or where the basin has been emptied the
adjacent ice pyramid appears to have added the whole depth to its own height. In
other places we look through fissures into large caverns filled with water up to
various levels. Godwin Austen made a special study of these spherical
reservoirs, noticing outlets upon their walls, some of which reached the
proportions of real tunnels traversed by endo-glacial torrents. I must mention
also the symmetrical conical hillocks on wide bases, entirely covered with
detritus, which reach sometimes a height of 300 feet. The Workmans, who observed
similar hillocks on the Hispar, attribute them to thrusts acting concentrically
from different directions. But Dr. Cesare Calciati and Dr. Mathias Koncza, who
accompanied the Workmans upon their last expedition, think they are due to
irregular surface melting. We did not get sufficient data to conclude in favour
of either hypothesis. On our way down from the median moraine to the right half
of the glacier we crossed a moraine streak of white marbles coming from the last
glacier on this side of the valley near the Concordia basin. Beyond 
this point the granite begins again. Here we also found scattered pebbles worn
to varying degrees of roundness.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![EMPTY BASIN OF GLACIAL LAKE.](Karakoram_210.jpg "EMPTY BASIN OF GLACIAL LAKE."){#b210}
::::

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Masherbrum from the Baltoro.](Karakoram_211.jpg "Masherbrum from the Baltoro."){#b211}
::::

Little by little the weather improved. Though the sky did not quite clear and
light mists were still lingering on some of the peaks, we now began to get sight
of surrounding summits which told us we were nearing the high peaks. It seemed
as if the whole southern chain of the Baltoro had no other office than to form a
base for the marvellous Masherbrum,^[^1202]^ which towered up in its midst, showing a
little dimly through the mist. lts gigantic northern wall is deeply furrowed and
loaded with glaciers breaking into icefalls down the sides of tremendous central
rib of rock. This latter is also covered in great part with ice, and leads up to
the small horn which forms the topmost peak, 25,660 feet. The second peak,
25,610 feet high, is hidden behind the first one. The foot of the mountain is at
least four miles from the Baltoro, and the space between is traversed by two
large glaciers, the Mundu and Yermanendu, which flow on either side of a long,
low and deeply indented spur, like a miniature chain of peaks running at right
angles to the main one. To the east of Masherbrum and beyond a series of minor
spurs which divide a few secondary valleys, the Baltoro receives two more
confluents as large as the glaciers of the Masherbrum, flowing down in great
icefalls from precipices loaded with snow. Then comes Mitre Peak^[^1205]^, a colossal,
strangely-shaped crag, which terminates the left wall of the valley. In front of
us, apparently quite close at hand, the transversal chain of the Gasherbrum^[^1203]^
seems to shut in the valley. It is a file of peaks and snow crests, stretching
on both sides of the precipitous rock wall of the Gasherbrum itself, all ridges
and ice gullies, and nearly 10,500 feet. It is bounded by two ridges which would
meet at a sharp angle were they prolonged beyond the truncated peak. To the
north of the Gasherbrum, on the continuation of the same range, the great
rounded domes of Broad Peak^[^1204]^ rise above the last spurs of the right wall of the
Baltoro, which still project in front of us. Lastly, to our rear the Mustagh
Tower has detached itself from the lesser peaks and stands up alone and
menacing. It has not even yet revealed the full splendour of its outlines.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![OPENING OF A RESERVOIR.](Karakoram_211a.jpg "OPENING OF A RESERVOIR."){#b211a}
::::

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![MITRE PEAK WITH SOUTH WALL OF THE BALTORO.](Karakoram_212.jpg "MITRE PEAK WITH SOUTH WALL OF THE BALTORO."){#b212}
::::


About 4 p.m., after a little over seven hours´ marching, when we had long passed
all the coolies, we found a spot on the moraine which was relatively level and
free from boulders, at a point half-way between Younghusband glacier and the
stage of Gore, or Biange, as Guillarmod has it. Here the Duke decided to place
the camp. The coolies did not arrive until after sunset. They had but ten loads
of firewood, all small and wet, and they experienced great difficulty in
kindling their tiny fires. The sky had clouded over, and it began to snow again.
We could not leave the poor wretches without shelter for the night with the snow
falling, so we lent them the two large tarpaulins. Quickly and thoroughly the
ingenious Baltis cleared two high squares from superfluous stones, built a low
wall around them, stretched the tarpaulins across, and were soon all sheltered,
packed as close as herrings, but quite happy and satisfied. In order not to
encroach upon their slender stock of firewood we inaugurated our Primus stoves,
which, as usual, required our personal supervision for the first few days, until
Bareux had time to learn how to use them.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![Gasherbrum.](Karakoram_213.jpg "Gasherbrum."){#b213}
::::

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![GASHERBRUM.](Karakoram_213a.jpg "GASHERBRUM."){#b213a}
::::

During the night the thermometer fell to several degrees under freezing point,
and the next morning was very chilly. The air was still but slightly veiled,
reminding us of the dusty horizons of the Indus valley. Our native guides made
us descend nearly at ounce into the deep trough between the valley wall and the
glacier, full of very unstable blocks, where the whole march is up and down
hill, because one has constantly to cross portions of the glacier which just out
on to the rock. These stretches were covered with very coarse detritus, upon
which yon must step very lightly, because if you move one block the whole of the
stony slope above and below you begins to slide down, and the least that could
happen would be an unexpected plunge in some marginal lake. It would doubtless
be easier and less dangerous to walk along the surface of the glacier, as we
should have done but for the violent objection of the coolies to marching on it,
not so much on account of the cold as from superstitions terrors.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![MITRE PEAK FROM THE CAMP BETWEEN RDOKASS AND THE CONCORDIA.](Karakoram_214.jpg "MITRE PEAK FROM THE CAMP BETWEEN RDOKASS AND THE CONCORDIA."){#b214}
::::

In less than an hour we reached a little lake at the foot of a secondary valley
(the next but one after the Younghushand glacier), which our coolies called the
stage of Gore. Here Conway camped (Pool Camp), also the
Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition (Biange); and one of the two parties
set up a cairn, which is still standing. From this point Conway ascended a peak
of the ridge above, 19,400 feet high, which he named Crystal Peak. Thence he
discovered the Concordia basin and the three mighty glaciers which flow down to
it—the Godwin Austen, the upper Baltoro and the Vigne. This peak which Conway
climbed has nothing to do with the one 20,587 feet high which bears the same
name on our map and lies farther east, almost directly above Doksam. The latter,
which is very well suited to be a topographical station of reference, owing to
its striking pointed shape, was provisionally called Crystal Peak by Negrotto in
is surveyving work, and the name was preserved inadvertently. In the course of a
topographical campaign it is unavoidable to give some temporary conventional
name or sign to peaks which have to be identified from different stations.
Beyond this casual naming the Duke, as I have explained, named none of the many
peaks measured by us, agreeing with Burrard that, until a rational system shall
be found, it is better to designate peaks simply by their altitudes.

We now crossed the mouth of another small valley, and at the next opening in the
wall we left the ice and skirted a gentle grassy slope where Conway had camped
(Fan Camp), and whence he climbed to a saddle on the ridge, from which he had
his first sight of K^2^ and was able to realize the vast dimensions of Broad Peak.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE MARBLE PEAK AT THE CORNER BETWEEN THE GODWIN AUSTEN AND THE BALTORO.](Karakoram_216.jpg "THE MARBLE PEAK AT THE CORNER BETWEEN THE GODWIN AUSTEN AND THE BALTORO."){#b216}
::::

We finally came back to the glacier proper, where we were able to proceed more
rapidly and with less fatigue, in a space between two bands of moraine where
there were numerous little lakes. In a few minutes we reached the last confluent
glacier on this side of the valley, which is not very large, and flows down from
a strange-looking peak, a pinnacle of pure white marble rising from a wide base
of black slaty schists, This glacier, like the Liligo, does not reach the
Baltoro, but ends not far from it, between two moraines of dazzling white
marble, in a great frontal wall of broken ice like a line of surf. The Shikari
Abdullah told us that this glacier had totally changed its appearance since
1902, when the Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition camped in the space
between it and the Baltoro (Doksam Camp). Certainly it would not now be possible
to set up the tents on the small level that remains, which is under continual
fire from the séracs of the advancing glacier.

We had now nearly reached the end of the Baltoro valley proper. At a short
distance from us a promontory from the base of the marble peak ran down to the
glacier. We knew that this was the last obstacle between us and the sight of the
Godwin Austen valley and K^2^, which lay behind it, and we were seized with
unspeakable restlessness and fear lest the mist should cut us off from the
long-looked-for reward, which had been in the background of our consciousness
through every step of the long way.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![FIRST SIGHT OF K^2^.](Karakoram_217.jpg "FIRST SIGHT OF K^2^."){#b217}
::::

We rounded the spur following the wide sweep of moraine, now grown level and
even, almost without noticing the vast space of the Concordia amphitheatre
spread out before us. Suddenly, and without warning, as if a veil had been
lifted from our eyes, the wide Godwin Austen valley lay before us in its whole
length. Down at the end, alone, detached from all the other mountains, soared up
K^2^, the indisputable sovereign of the region, gigantic and solitary, hidden
from human sight by innmumerable ranges, jealously defended by a vast throng of
vassal peaks, protected from invasion by miles and miles of glaciers. Even to
get within sight of it demands so much contrivance, so much marching, such a sum
of labours.

It fills the whole end of the valley, with nothing to draw the attention from
it. All the lines of the landscape seem to meet and converge in it. The
mountains group themselves about it, yet without any intrusion upon it or
interference with its extraordinary upward effort. Its lines are ideally
proportioned and perfectly balanced, its architectural design is powerful,
adequate to the majesty of the peak without being heavy; the steepness of its
sides, its ridges and its glaciersi1s appalling; its rocky wall is 12,000 feet
high.

For a whole hour we stood absorbed. We gazed, we minutely inspected, we examined
with our glasses the incredible rock wall. All the time our minds were assailed
with increasing doubt, culminating almost in certainty, that this side of the
mountain was not accessible, and did not offer even a reasonable point of
attack. Meantime the atmosphere grew gradually thicker, the veil of whitish
vapour heavier, stretching and expanding and melting together, until even the
last spectral image disappeared and a uniform grey curtain of mist filled the
end of the valley. The vision was gone. Beneath a lowering sky the Concordia
ice-plain lost itself to the south in the dim vastness of the upper Baltoro.

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1200]: [From here Godwin Austen climbed part way up one of the spurs of the southern chain of the Baltoro in order to get a view of K^2^-]{.footnote}

[^1201]: [See the letter of SIR W. M. CONWAY  in *Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc.* 14. 1892, p. 857.]{.footnote}

[^1202]: [*Masherbrum*: refer [Masherbrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masherbrum)]{.footnote}

[^1203]: [*Gasherbrum*: refer [Gasherbrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gasherbrum)]{.footnote}

[^1204]: [*Broad Peak*: refer [Broad Peak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Broad_Peak)]{.footnote}

[^1205]: [*Mitre Peak*: refer [Mitre Peak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitre_Peak,_Pakistan)]{.footnote}


 