# CHAPTER XIII.<br /> FROM CONCORDIA TO THE FOOT OF K^2^.<br />PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS AND FIRST ATTEMPT. {#thirteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Concordia Amphitheatre. — Confluent Glaciers. — The Southern Wall of K^2^.
— Broad Peak. Gasherbrum, Golden Throne and Bride Peak.— The Arrangement of the
Moraines, — Photogrammetric Work begun. — The Lower Part of the Godwin Austen. —
Structure of the Broad-Gasherbrum Range. — Height of Broad Peak determined. —
The  "Nieves Penitentes"  of Dr. Workman. — The Camp at the Base of K^2^. —
Exploration of the Fastern and Western Slopes. — The Plan of Attack. — The Camp
moved to the Southern Ridge of K^2^.— The Duke leaves the Base Camp. — Three
Days on the Slopes of K^2^. — Defeat. — Return to Camp. — Coolies and Crows. —
Snowfalls and Avalanches.<br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_219.jpg ""){#b219}
::::

THE dawn of May 25th found us up and abroad. The thermometer stood at 15° F. On
the evening before veils of mist and cloud-curtains had so shrouded the
landscape that we had not in the least realized the incredible spectacle of
glaciers and mountains which now stood revealed in the pale light of morning.
The air was perfectly still and just lightly dimmed. like a crystal breathed
upon, yet clear enough to show every detail of the marvellous scene.^[^1301]^

We had camped on one side of the huge glacial cross roads, named by Conway the
Concordia, after the glacial basin of the Oberland, in which the Aletsch, the
largest glacier in Europe, has its source.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![MITRE PEAK FROM THE CORNER BETWEEN THE BALTORO AND THE GODWIN AUSTEN.](Karakoram_220.jpg "MITRE PEAK FROM THE CORNER BETWEEN THE BALTORO AND THE GODWIN AUSTEN."){#b220}
::::

The basin is formed by the bifurcation of the Baltoro valley, at the foot of the
bastion made by the Broad Peak (Gasherbrum range). One of the two branches of
the valley is the Godwin Austen, which goes up northward to K^2^. The other is
the Upper Baltoro, which runs southeast to Golden Throne and Bride Peak.^[^1302]^ Both
valleys then curve eastward, and combined they form a letter C made up of nearly
31 miles of glaciers. In addition to these, two other good-sized glaciers come
into the Concordia from the western walls of the Broad-Gasherbrum chain. They
meet directly outside their own valleys, and wedge themselves between the
Baltoro and the Godwin Austen, crossing the basin in a white stripe of bare ice
between the moraines of the two main glaciers. These four main affluents alone
are at least five miles broad, without counting the numberless smaller
tributaries coming in from the valleys, gorges and couloirs of the mountain
chains; while the basin which receives them all is only two and a half miles in
diameter, and the Baltoro valley itself, into which the whole mass is
compressed, less than two miles broad. The entrance to the latter is guarded by
two characteristic heights—to the north Conway’s Angle Peak,^[^1303]^ a marble summit
20,088 feet high: and to the south the bizarre tooth-shaped Mitre Peak. 20,462
feet high, entirely composed of black schist.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SOUTHERN VIEW OF K^2^.](Karakoram_221.jpg "SOUTHERN VIEW OF K^2^."){#b221}
::::

On every side the eve meets a spreading vista of wide valleys filled with almost
level glaciers, which go up at a gentle slope among the lofty chains. The Godwin
Austen is composed of parallel stripes of black and white, formed by the
alternation of bare ice and moraine detritus. It runs northward for six miles to
the base of K^2,^ which rises, a pyramid of rock, 12,000 feet high from base to
summit. between two ridges that outline themselves to west and east against the
sky. The first of these 15 all rock, running straight down to the valley. The
second forms a broad ice-covered shoulder nearly 3,000 feet below the terminal
peak, from the edge of which it drops in a very steep descent divided into
two minor crests. In the centre of the pyramid another great rocky ridge comes
down directly south-west to a narrow icy saddle (Negrotto Pass, 21,322 feet),
beyond which it shoots up in a graceful snowy peak (22,490 feet high) of a
slender pointed shape, recalling our own Grivola. The neighbourhood of the
colossus robs it of all significance.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![LOWER PEAKS OF THE GASHERBRUM PEAKS.](Karakoram_222.jpg "LOWER PEAKS OF THE GASHERBRUM PEAKS."){#b222}
::::

The southern face of the mountain is cut obliquely by a glacier coming down from
the eastern shoulder in four great leaps or cascades of seracs, separated by
slanting terraces. All the ridges and gullies of the wall are exposed to its
avalanches. The terminal cone, from the saddle up, shows plainly the
stratification of the rocks. Every mountaineer will recognize, at first sight of
the illustrations, the resemblance of K^2^, as seen from the south, to the
Matterhorn.

The valley appears to end at the foot of the mountain; instead of which it bends
abruptly north-east, and runs in between K^2^ and the northern slopes of Broad
Peak. The heavy and massive outline of the latter, surmounted by its three huge
rounded peaks, comprises in itself almost the whole left side of the Godwin
Austen valley. A short broken ridge joins it to Gasherbrum IV^[^1304]^ summit rises above
the spur dividing its two western glaciers. From the Gasherbrums the chain
extends toward the south in a tagged edge of rocks and snowy peaks to form the
western side of the Concordia amphitheatre and the upper Baltoro.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BRIDE PEAK FROM THE GODWIN-AUSTEN, NEAR THE CONCORDIA.](Karakoram_223.jpg "BRIDE PEAK FROM THE GODWIN-AUSTEN, NEAR THE CONCORDIA."){#b223}
::::

The upper Baltoro uses gently toward the south-east, and has an aspect similar
to that of the Godwin Austen. It is covered with stripes of moraine, which grow
narrower and farther apart as they go up the valley, and are divided by wider
and wider spaces of bare ice: it runs to the foot of a mountain whose broad.
rounded top is covered with glaciers. This is Conway’s Golden Throne, some 15 or
16 miles distant from the Concordia. Here the Baltoro turns eastward and
disappears from view. A wide glacier-covered depression separates Golden Throne
from Bride Peak on the west. The latter, too, is white with snow. It turns
toward us its characteristic northern wall, shaped like a trapezium, topped by a
long ridge, the ends of which form the two peaks of the mountain. The one to the
east, 325 feet higher than the other, is a station of the Indian Survey
(Karakoram No. 8. 25,110 feet). From Bride Peak a long spur runs northward
toward us, ending in a sharp angle. Between it and Mitre Peak opens the Vigne
valley, which contains the third largest glacier of the Concordia basin.

The picture presented by the mountain groups just described, which close our
horizon to the south with their glacier-covered flanks, is entirely different
from that formed by the precipitous rocks of K^2^ and the crags of the western
ranges extending to the Gasherbrum and beyond. The eye and mind of the
mountaineer turn for relief to the broad curving lines of Golden Throne and the
snowy sides and ice-covered wall of Bride Peak, since everywhere else he looks
he sees nothing but perpendicular rocks, sheer precipices thousands of feet
high, turreted battlements of rock, needles, pinnacles, sheets of ice bordered
with great cornices, walls and gorges running at extravagant angles up to
extravagant heights, crowned by séracs, and showing everywhere the gleam of
living ice. Yet, despite it all, one felt the compelling and irresistible
ambition toward a closer acquaintance and more intimate knowledge of the lonely
giant which so few men before us had ever even beheld.

It was only on the return journey, after the end of the campaign upon K^2^, that
the rare occurrence of two days of unbroken fine weather enabled Sella to take
panoramas [C](https://flic.kr/p/2niqbj2) and [D](https://flic.kr/p/2niqgtf)—the
first from the outer base angle of the marble peak which stands on the corner
between the Baltoro and Godwin Austen glaciers (17,329 feet); the second from a
point opposite the first, 17,917 feet high, on the western ridge of the
Gasherbrum. Taken together these two panoramas show the whole region of which
the Concordia basin is the centre, and the great glacial streams that converge
in it. They also bring out clearly the arrangement of the moraines, which is
almost geometrical in its regularity. It seems unbelievable that a haphazard
combination of rocks, ice and snow on so vast a scale could result in such a
harmony of line and form. The long, sinuous bands of moraine, converging and
blending into one, or remaining separate and running down in pairs of rigidly
parallel lines as far as the eye can follow them into the lower Baltoro, seem
like a graphic representation of the movement of the glacial masses, and give
one a very definite idea of the ice-flow. The panoramas show likewise the series
of ranges running up and up, one behind the other, to the last point of vision
and beyond, as well as the innumerable host of peaks that tower above them. The
work of triangulation carried out on the photogrammetric survey of the
expedition has designated a considerable number of these peaks, ascertaining
their height and position; but there remain countless others, by no means small
or unimportant, not indicated by any sign upon the map.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![From a western spur of Gasherbrum.](Karakoram_224.jpg "From a western spur of Gasherbrum."){#b224}
::::

On our first view of it, in the morning of May 25th, the landscape was still
shrouded in the spring snows. It looked quite different at the end of June, when
Sella took his photographs. The impression made upon us was so strong, so
moving, that no words can convey it to the render. It was like no other
experience, it provoked no recollections or comparisons. So inconceivable vast
are the structural lines of the landscape, that the idea comes into one’s mind
of being in the workshop of nature, and of standing before the primeval chaos
and cosmos of a world as yet unvisited by the phenomenon of life.

In all Alpine ascents one knows one has left the green fields, the trees and the
villages only a day behind; and from all the heights one looks down on the
green mantle of verdure covering the earth. The bare rocks and ice are but
limited areas, not huge unconfined wastes, Here one is conscious of not a single
manifestation of life. It is comparable to the polar regions in this respect,
but in no other, for instead of the monotonous horizons of the far north, all
the landscape around K^2^ has the richest variety of design, the greatest
majesty of form, and an infinite diversity of plane and perspective.

The scale is far too vast for one to receive an impression of the whole at once.
The eye can only take in single portions. For a long time we did not become
fully conscious of the dimensions of the landscape. We had no standards of
comparison, and the glaciers and valleys are so well adjusted in their
proportions to the surrounding mountains that it was hard to realize the
absolute size of any object. All this was revealed to us gradually, by dint of
daily contemplation and detailed observation, most of all by repeated failures
in estimating heights and distances. Thus it happened that our amazement,
instead of diminishing with familiarity, grew greater every day, and this
extraordinary region never made a more profound impression upon us than on the
day when we bade it farewell.

The Concordia basin, lying in the heart of the ranges, at the junction of their
greatest glaciers, is the place above all others adapted for the base or point
of departure for topographical work. Four of the most important trigonometrical
stations of the region are visible from it—K^2^, Gasherbrum IV, Bride Peak
(Karakoram No. 8) and Masherbrum I.

For this reason the Duke had arranged the evening before that we three should
remain at the Concordia for a whole day, while he, with the guides and the bulk
of the luggage, went up the Godwin Austen glacier to the foot of K^2^ to look
for a suitable spot for a base camp. whence he could conduct operations upon all
the slopes of the mountain. This plan was carried out. Unfortunately the misty
atmosphere, which later became actual fog, prevented Sella from doing any
photographic work. Negrotto, however, succeeded in getting out two panoramas
available for topographical purposes.

The next morning we said good-bye to Mr. Baines, who went back to Rdokass with
all the coolies except the ten chosen to remain with us. We then set out to join
our leader at the foot of K^2^. The weather was perfect, for the first time
since we had set foot on the glacier. The clear sky, the pure transparent air
and the splendour of the sunlit snows, seemed to us like a welcome to the
region, and filled our minds with the boldest hopes.

For some distance we proceeded along a tongue of ice between two stripes of the
left-hand moraine. On this side, between the Concordia amphitheatre and K^2^,
the Godwin Austen receives two affluents. The lower comes in between the Crystal
Peak chain and a short ridge that runs up to the water shed; the second is a
more considerable glacier, coming from the western slopes of K^2^. Between the
two, at the foot of the intervening spur, the Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod
expedition placed their Camp VIII. We were gradually getting nearer the centre
of the glacier, which is occupied by wide median moraines still largely
snow-covered. The snow lay very unevenly: in some places a couple of feet deep;
in others, even outside the moraine, it had quite disappeared. All the
longitudinal furrows of the glacier had water running in them from the surface
melting, covered by a more or less thick sheet of ice. Some of us, walking
rather incautiously, went in over our knees in the icy water.

We walked at an easy pace up the hardly perceptible slope, glad to have left
behind the rough moraines of the Baltoro. The sun was mild and the reverberation
not severe. Little wisps of tourmente raised by the wind floated here and there
over the high ridges, moving across the pale blue sky. Immense chains rose all
about us as far as the eye could see. In spite of their size, the mountains have
all the bold design to be seen anywhere in the Alps—the barren precipices, the
snowy slopes and the upward thrust of slender peaks, the ample curving cornices,
the multiform broken architecture of séracs, and the overweighted glaciers
hanging on vertical rocks. But all this exists with such luxuriance and upon
such a gigantic scale, that one stands bewildered in the midst of a scene that
seems to beggar the human imagination.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE WESTERN FACE OF BROAD PEAK.](Karakoram_227.jpg "THE WESTERN FACE OF BROAD PEAK."){#b227}
::::

The left wall of this part of the Godwin Austen is largely formed by a low screen
of black rock, which detaches itself from the western crest of Broad Peak and
runs southward. Behind it the glaciers of the whole enormous wall of Broad Peak
fall down and run together. Wherever this wall is not covered with ice one can
see distinctly the light grey rock arranged in broad strata. We had already
noted the similar appearance of the rock in the spurs of the Gasherbrums. From
an examination of the moraines that have their origin in the various mountains,
we were able to ascertain that the whole chain of Broad Peak and the
Gasherbrums, including Hidden Peak and Golden Throne as well, is a sedimentary
formation; while the outer curve of the letter C formed by the two great
valleys, covering all the distance from

Staircase to Bride Peak, taking in the pyramid of K^2,^ is composed of
crystalline rocks, granites, gneiss and quartzes, with the single exception of
the marble peak which forms the corner between the lower Baltoro and the Godwin
Austen. This last appears to be a splinter broken oft from the calcareous mass
of the other side of the valley. Ing. Novarese has confirmed our conclusions by
an analysis of the mineral specimens brought back by the expedition. With the
aid of our descriptions and Sella’s photographs he has been able fo reconstruct
on its general lines the geological scheme of the high glacier basin. Most
interesting to observe it the close analogy between its structure and that of
the great glacial valley of the Siachen, which lies south-east of the upper
Baltoro. Dr. Longstaff, who explored the latter in this same summer of 1909, and
demonstrated for the first time its vast extent, mentions the fact that it is
contained within a compound formation, one wall being a granite chain to the
south-west, and the other, on the north-east, a range of limestone sedimentary
rock. The latter contains Mount Teram Kangri^[^1306]^, 24,500 feet high.

The presence of calcareous rock in the Gasherbrums is sufficiently evident, and
did not entirely escape the observation of Conway. He says that the Concordia
basin is surrounded by mountains in which one can distinguish alternate black
and pale grey streaks of gneiss, granite and limestone. T. G. Bonney and Miss C.
A. Raisin, who made the mineralogical report of Conway's expedition, concluded
from their examination of the specimens brought back that “a considerable mass
of sedimentary rock must be infolded from Gasherbrum to Golden Throne.”
Guillarmod only mentions the white marbles of the Doksam glacier, near the angle
between the Baltoro and the Godwin Austen.^[^1305]^ But up to now the vast extension of
sedimentary rock had not been suspected by any one, nor the fact that it forms
the chief constituent of the whole mighty barrier which interrupts the course of
the Baltoro on the west. Even in the recent monograph of Burrard and Hayden, the
axis of the great Himalayan peaks and of the mountain systems belonging to them
is described as a granite formation.

It is probable that the thick-set form and huge mass of Broad Peak rather
blinded Godwin Austen and Conway to its remarkable height. The result obtained
by triangulation from Negrotto's data shows it to possess a peak 27,132 feet
high, flanked by two others of 26,024 and 26,000 feet. No other mountain over
27,000 feet has been found since 1858, and Burrard considered it improbable that
there would be further discoveries of peaks 27,000 or even 26,000 feet high. In
a list of o highest known mountains Broad Peak would occupy the sixth place,
those ranking above it being Mount Everest, K^2,^ the two peaks of Kinchinjunga,
and Makalu in the Everest group. All these peaks have been measured from several
stations, with all the exactitude at present obtainable, considering that there
exist some elements not precisely calculable. such as that of refraction, which
thus remain sources of possible error. The peaks recently discovered are still
awaiting the confirmation of further observations carried out from different
stations and with more precise methods.

In our first stage on the Godwin Austen we did not, as this long digression
would seem to indicate, concentrate our attention on Broad Peak. K^2^ had too
great a fascination for us, now that we could observe it from base to summit. As
we approached it the wall appeared to grow less steep, but, on the other hand,
the obstacles became more evident—the live ice of the gullies, dominated by
overhanging séracs; the gleam of *verglas* on the rocks; the sheer precipices
showing everywhere on the face of the wall. We left the central moraine where it
began to curve toward the base of the south-western spur, and walked across on
the glacier to the left-hand marginal one. Where it rounds the western angle of
Broad Peak the glacier is heaved up in folds cut and broken in every direction,
forming a perfect cataract of séracs. These waves, gradually diminishing in
height, reach to the centre of the glacier, and there form in regular rows of
small séracs along the sides of long flat corridors, which afford an easy and
rapid progress. Dr. Workman would call these formations "nieves penitentes,
sérac variety.” The term *nieves penitentes* is generally used to designate
specific surface formations of the snow in the Andes mountains and other places,
caused cither by melting or by the wind. Dr. Workman has, in repeated
publications,^[^1307]^ urged its extension to all the manifold projections and
protuberances which render uneven the surface of mountain ice or snow, and has
created at will a complicated classification, distinguishing eight varieties and
three sub-varieties. It is not easy to understand the advantage gained from
confounding the most diverse glacial formations, which have neither origin,
production nor composition in common.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![SOUTHERN WALL OF K^2^.](Karakoram_230.jpg "SOUTHERN WALL OF K^2^."){#b230}
::::

We directed our steps straight toward the angle at the right side of the glacier
which cuts the southern wall of K^2^ and flows out on the Godwin Austen with a
high front of séracs, like the tributaries of the Baltoro. At the foot of this
glacier is a small stretch of marginal moraine, shut in between the valley wall
and the side of the Godwin Austen, below a depression in the south-western spur
of K^2^ (Negrotto Pass). Here there was a refuge from falling stones and ice,
protected on three sides from the wind, and getting the sun from early morning
till four in the afternoon. Upon this spot the Duke had fixed his camp. K^2^
towered up immediately above us, but so foreshortened as to lose much of its
height—it does not seem possible that it rises to nearly 12,000 feet above us.
Broad Peak is opposite, across the valley; while to westward rises a beautiful
snowy range with inaccessible cliffs. It forms the right side of the glacier
that curves about the western side of K^2^, and empties itself upon the Godwin
Austen in a great wave of séracs. To the south there is a spreading view that
ends in the gentle and reposeful outlines of Bride Peak and the snowy saddle on
its left.

The camp was deserted when we reached it. The Duke, according to his habit, had
not lost an hour, but set to work at once. Accompanied by Giuseppe Petigax and
Enrico Brocherel, he had reached the mouth of the glacier which comes into the
Godwin Austen below the camp, and climbing its terminal cascade, not without
considerable difficulty, gradually rounded the end of the south-western spur of
K^2^. Beyond the séracs the glacier expands into a wide valley running northward
below an impregnable wall of rock, the western flank of K^2^. The valley ends in
a broad rounded col, upon which descends the northwestern ridge of the mountain,
which is less steep than the southern ridge. If one could, with the help of the
coolies, once set up a camp on this saddle, there would remain only about 6,500
feet to conquer between it and the peak. The Duke climbed the glacier up past
its centre, searching on his return for some way of access to the valley that
would be easier for the coolies than the route over broken ice, full of
treacherous cracks, by which he had entered it. The furrow between the glacier
and the rock on the left side of the valley gave him what he sought, and at
three in the afternoon he returned to the camp.

In the meantime a second party, composed of Alexis and Emilio Brocherel, Bareux
and Savoie, had gone up the Godwin Austen above the camp to examine the eastern
slopes of K^2^. Their report was not very encouraging. The long north-eastern
ridge was out of the question, as well as the whole eastern side of the
mountain, which was extremely steep, covered with ice and exposed to avalanches
of séracs. They then turned their attention to a ridge of rock visible from the
camp, running directly up from the glacier to the edge of the great snowy
shoulder of the mountain. This was the only route that looked at all possible to
them.

Thus on the first day after reaching the foot of K^2^ the Duke had already made
a cursory examination of two-thirds of the circumference of the mountain.
Nowhere had he discovered an easy, obvious and safe route to the peak, and the
undertaking assumed a doubtful hue. Nor did there appear to be in the
neighborhood any low saddle, any easy pass, by which to get over and examine the
northern side. Moreover, Colonel Sir Francis Younghusband, who had seen the
northern ridge of K^2^ from no great distance, described its precipitous and
forbidding aspect in terms that left very little to hope for a route on that
side. The Duke decided to act at once upon the knowledge already gained. but
before choosing any one slope in preference to others, he waited in order to
examine for himself on the morrow the rocky ridge which Alexis Brocherel had
proposed for a trial.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE BASE CAMP AND RIGHT WALL OF THE SAVOIA GLACIER.](Karakoram_232.jpg "THE BASE CAMP AND RIGHT WALL OF THE SAVOIA GLACIER."){#b232}
::::

Meanwhile we had sent the coolies back to bring up the few remaining loads left
behind at the Concordia. By May 27th we had established our camp and were
provisioned for a month, sufficient for a long siege. The tents were set up in
two rows on the levelled stony surface of the moraine, with the little
settlement of coolies a hundred feet away and a little below us. Our stores were
sheltered within stone walls with the tarpaulins stretched over them. Thus the
place (Camp III on the map) was, in all its arrangements, a permanent
encampment and point of departure for the explorations to take place on K^2^. A
series of meteorological observations was kept up there synchronous with those
carried on at Rdokass and the four Kashmir stations. The result gave for the
camp a height of 16,493^[^1308]^ feet, and it became a second station of reference next
to Rdokass, for the calculations of pressure readings taken by the expedition on
the glaciers that girdle the base of K^2^.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![Camp at the Base of the Southern Wall of K^2^.](Karakoram_233.jpg "Camp at the Base of the Southern Wall of K^2^."){#b233}
::::

The Duke decided to make the attempt on the southern ridge of the mountain. It
is certainly steeper and longer than the northwestern crest, which runs down to
the col at the head of the glacier he had already explored. But, on the other
hand, it had certain advantages. In the first place, there was not the unknown
quantity of the climb up the ice-wall to arrive at the col, And more important
still, the slope faced full south and got the sun from early in the morning.
This is a consideration of the greatest importance in ascents above 24,000 feet,
as the intense cold can prove not only a difficulty, but a grave danger to the
explorer.

The route being chosen, it remained to settle upon a plan of campaign. Almost
everywhere on the ridge we could see with our binoculars the gleam of*verglas*,
bare ice, hard and polished like crystal, which gives the last touch of
difficulty and danger to a climb. However, we hoped that a few days’ sun and
wind might lay bare the rugged rock, where one would be able to get a grip with
hands and nailed boots. About 3,500 feet above the valley there stood out from
the ridge a prominent rock of a reddish-yellow colour. The plan was to make a
high camp there with the Whymper tents, so as to be able to wait a few days if
necessary. The small light Mummery tents are no protection against the weather,
being good only for temporary night shelters. From this spot the Duke hoped to
gain the shoulder of the mountain. making an intermediate light camp with the
Mummery tents. The peak itself, from the shoulder up, looked inaccessible from
where we were; but even if it proved quite impossible on nearer view. the
conquest of the shoulder (25,354 feet) was in itself an undertaking amply worth
while.

Despite the most painstaking and rigid selection of equipment, our luggage,
consisting of tents, sleeping-bags, food for a week, cooking apparatus and
paraffin, and the Alpine outfit, made a considerable weight and bulk which we
knew not how to reduce further. It was useless to embark on such a project
without being armed at all points. But a calculation of ways and means brought
us to the irresistible conclusion that it would not he possible for any of us to
accompany the Duke. He therefore made up his mind to go alone, with all the
resources of the expedition, intent on reaching the highest possible point at a
dash. Then, if his powers did not hold out to the last proof, he would come
back, leaving the tents on the ridge, and handing on the undertaking to one of
us, who would have the advantage of fresh strength and the fact that the
equipment was already on the spot.

We discussed all these details, and made ready the loads with the greatest cave.
The mountains about us were constantly flinging down long white avalanches of
snow, enveloped in flying dustlike clouds, and filling the valleys with rumbling
echoes. During these two days of good weather we had had a prevailing cast and
north-east wind, but now towards evening it was veering to the south-east and
the air became somewhat less pure. 

Guides, porters and coolies worked for two days, carrying the necessary
equipment up to the ridge. We meanwhile occupied ourselves with the
never-finished task of adjusting the camp, arranging the tents more suitably,
filling up with stones the holes in the ice to prevent the formation of puddles,
and levelling off surfaces with pickaxes. The weather became bad again. The wind
whistled on the high ridges as violently as on the Alps in winter. Storms raged
about the summits and snowy peaks, and long streamers of fog, tattered and
tenuous, were brought up by the south-west wind. The veils of mist gradually
thickened and settled down layer after layer around K^2^ and Broad Peak. Above
the Concordia basin the sky was all streaked with clouds, which hung dark and
lowering over the entrance to the Baltoro. The temperature remained steadily
below freezing point. There were no more avalanches, and when the wind was down
the silence was so unbroken as to become oppressive.

On the morning of May 30th all was ready. The weather had not changed and the
mountains looked sinister. We bade adieu to our leader with good wishes, which
did not succeed in disguising from ourselves the insecurity we felt as to the
outcome of his bold undertaking. The simple fact is that these are not mountains
like other mountains, and one cannot look at them without disquiet and
foreboding.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE DUKE LEAVING THE BASE CAMP.](Karakoram_235.jpg "THE DUKE LEAVING THE BASE CAMP."){#b235}
::::

The Duke was accompanied by the three guides, the four porters and the coolies,
carrying their own tents and supply of chupattis. He crossed the front of the
glacier that comes down from the southern wall of K^2^, and went up the Godwin
Austen to the foot of the southern ridge, some 500 feet higher than the base
camp, traversing the broken margin of the glacier and the shallow depression
between it and the wall. and climbing up over broken detritus loosely scattered
over the solid rock. The cline was moderate. He kept close to the right side of
the ridge, and reached a sheltered sunny nook (18,245 feet high) at the base of
a rocky tooth, where the guides deposited the equipment. Little levels were soon
made by means of retaining walls, for the two Whymper tents. The coolies camped
close by. After a few hours of rest and some food, the guides, porters and
coolies, with their loads, started on again. But only a short distance from the
tents the coolies flung down their burdens and turned back, despite the commands
and entreaties of the guides. The latter kept on climbing between the principal
ridge and a secondary one to the east of it, and then by small ravines and
divisional crests, till they reached a narrow saddle less than 1.000 feet above
the camp. The rock was broken and mingled with snow and ice, but thus far the
way had not been difficult, though here and there exposed to falling stones.
They put down their loads on this saddle, and went back to the tents.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SOUTHERN RIDGE OF K^2^.](Karakoram_236.jpg "SOUTHERN RIDGE OF K^2^."){#b236}
::::

May 31st turned out unexpectedly fine and still. The loads now weighed only 25
lbs., and the coolies consented to take them and follow the guides up to the
saddle. A steep icy couloir runs down to it, divides and continues lower down in
two branches. It was impossible to climb up along the rocks on the sides of the
couloirs, so the guides went up the gully itself, leaving the coolies at the
bottom with Bareux. They climbed for a short distance on hard snow, then on bare
ice, sticking to the left side in order to utilize the rocky projections. on
which they fixed more than 100 yards of rope for a help to those coming after
with the loads. In this way they gained 600 feet, and then succeeded in
clambering up the rock some 300 feet more. They turned back at about three in
the afternoon, after having reached a height of certainly 20,000 feet. In two
hours they were again at the tents.

In the meantime the Duke had remained alone at the camp, and had taken this
opportunity to examine minutely the central portion of the Godwin Austen. From
where he was he had a view of the whole formidable northern wall of Broad Peak
and of the semi-circular basin which connects it with the left-hand ridge of the
upper glacier. He noted in the edge of this basin a depression easily reached by
a wide couloir full of snow, and he made up his mind to climb this later on in
order to examine the region east of the Gasherbrums. Avalanches of ice were
hurling themselves down from Broad Peak at frequent intervals, and even at this
distance he could hear their roar.

From all that they had been able to ascertain from the ridge above the couloir,
the guides thought there would be no very grave obstacles to encounter; but it
was plain that the ascent would take much longer than they had thought. For this
reason the Duke sent six coolies back to the base camp next morning to bring up
provisions for a longer stay. They came down roped together, bringing us a
letter from the Duke, which we naturally received with great eagerness. The sun
and wind had bronzed even the tough skins of these Baltis; but they were in
their usual good temper, and started back directly the things were readyfood for
themselves and for the Europeans, extra rope and pickaxes.

In the meanwhile those on the ridge had lost no time, even though the weather
had again turned adverse. The guides and porters, free from the encumbrance of
luggage, left the tents in the morning bent on exploring a good stretch of the
ridge to find out if it offered a chance of ascent before fetching up more
impedimenta, perhaps uselessly. They climbed rapidly to the saddle, then on up
the couloir by the rope left, there the day before. This height gained, they
found themselves on a slender crest of rocks quite broken and crumbling, so as
to give no security to the foot nor safe hold for the hands. On one side went
down steeply into the valley the couloir by which they had come up; on the other
a dizzy steep of ice descended to the Godwin Austen, 3,000 feet and more below.
The guides were unanimous in telling the story of the incredible optical
illusions they suffered, all due to the deceptiveness of these mountains. Slabs
of rock which at a few yards distant looked like gentle and easy inclines,
turned out to be little less than perpendicular. It was impossible to estimate
the grade of the slopes or the distances between salient points of the ascent.
These conditions had misled them when, on the day before, they had measured with
their eyes the route above the couloir.

The cold wind had raised up a little tourmente, fortunately not enough to
interfere with their progress. They went on for three hours, with all the
slowness and precautions rendered necessary by the difficulties of the route,
climbing always toward the reddish rock where the Duke had hoped to set up camp,
and never reaching it, though it seemed constantly within a few steps of them.
It would be necessary to fix ropes all the way, for the porters to use in
fetching up the loads. As for the coolies, taking them over such rough ground
was not to be thought of.

The guides finally came to the reluctant conclusion that it was useless to
proceed further, not because they had encountered insurmountable obstacles, but
because it was hopeless to think of bringing so long and formidable an ascent to
a successful issue, when from the very first steps they had met with such
difficulties as made the climb barely possible to guides not hampered by loads,
and put out of the question the conveying of luggage necessary to keep one from
perishing of cold and exhaustion. They came slowly back, gathering up the rope
they had put along the way. The Duke heard their report, and wisely decided to
relinquish the attack in that direction.

The next day, June 2nd, before 12 o’clock we were again united, and we ceased
our anxious scrutiny of the ridge through our telescope. The weather grew
steadily worse, and before evening it began to snow heavily. It was fortunate
that the Duke had at least been able to satisfy himself of the actual conditions
to be faced on the ridge of K^2^. Among other things the experience had proved
that the coolies, when properly equipped and protected, can hold out in the high
camps, and can even do without fire, at least for some days. At the base camp
they seemed very much at home. They spent their time squatting about then little
fires, wich they tended with the utmost care and economy, and boiling tea in our
empty provision tins. They do not carry fire, like the Bakonjo in Africa, always
coming to beg matches of us directly we reached a stage. We noticed on our
arrival at the base camp their number had increased to eleven, by the addition
of a chief or Jemadar. He went up with the others to the upper ridge, but came
back with an attack of acute enteritis, and we were obliged to send him down to
Rdokass with the first provision caravan. In the absence of a head, personal
relations were established between ourselves and the coolies. Though we could
only communicate by means of a few words of Urdu our design had picked up in
former Himalayan expeditions, there were no difficulties or misunderstandings,
and we led a life of the utmost harmony up to the end.

My, Baines sent us regular caravans, bringing fowls, eggs and roast mutton, as
well as wood and chupattis for the coolies. But our rations were always
sufficient and well-balanced, and we preferred our tinned foods to the Rdokass
meat. The eggs, however, were always a great addition. Every seven or eight days
we received post, with wonderful and gratifying regularity.

Our constant companions in camp were a dozen great crows, who hopped about among
the tents, picking up remnants of food and displaying rather curiosity than fear
of us. Every time an exploring party set out and made a camp elsewhere, a pair
or so of these crows attended them. They actually followed the Duke to the ridge
of K^2^. Sometimes we saw a stray falcon sweeping the sky 3,000 or 4,000 feet
above the valley. Later in the season the small rodents we had seen at Rdokass
made their appearance and maintained existence, one knew not how, amid
surroundings that seemed incompatible with any sort of animal life. Sella even
saw some of them at nearly 18,000 feet of altitude on the rocky ridges around
the Concordia basin.

Negrotto had profited by a few hours of clear weather to continue the survey of
the Godwin Austen with the tacheometer and photogrammetric camera. The
surrounding mountains rise so high and so abruptly above the valley that it was
necessary to go for some distance away from them on the glacier in order to get
their summits into the picture although the camera was fitted with a wide angle
lens; while with the tacheometer one is never certain of sighting exactly the
mountain summits with the telescope.

It snowed uninterruptedly for twenty-four hours. Then on June 3rd the great
curtain of fog was rent in every direction, and peaks and mountain walls emerged
in fresh splendour. Some light wreaths of mist still hanging about the slopes
looked grey against the dazzling whiteness of the snow. The mountains were not
slow to shake off its weight, and on every side the snow barely deposited on the
steep inclines began to fall off and slide down into the reservoirs which feed
the sources of the great ice rivers. The valleys resounded with the noise. We
had a perfectly clear and calm sunset. The lofty snows of K^2^ were tinged with
yellow. The most delicate wisp of rose-coloured cloud barely hid the topmost
peak, and a triple shadow flung itself all across the mighty wall, growing more
and more distinct. The moon, not yet in sight, was projecting upon K^2^ the
giant profile of Broad Peak, while the northern face of the latter still
diffused a tranquil white light from its snowy surface. Far to the south Bride
Peak stood out white and clear against the steel-blue sky. Now the valley shook
to the roar of an avalanche of ice—prolonged, cyclopean. The temperature had
gone down to several degrees below freezing, and we reluctantly turned from the
splendour of the moonlit night to take refuge in our warm sleeping-bags.

On the morrow would begin the execution of a new plan of campaign.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Broad Peak at Sunset.](Karakoram_240.jpg "Broad Peak at Sunset."){#b240}
::::

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1301]: [See the map of the Baltoro and panoramas [C](https://flic.kr/p/2niqbj2) and [D](https://flic.kr/p/2niqgtf).]{.footnote}

[^1302]: [*Bride Peak*: refer [Chogolisa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chogolisa)]{.footnote}

[^1303]: [*Angle Peak*: refer [Angel Sar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angel_Sar)]{.footnote}

[^1304]: [*Gasherbrum IV*: refer [Gasherbrum IV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gasherbrum_IV)]{.footnote}

[^1305]: [He says also that marble has been found "sur les flancs mémes du Chogori" (K^2^), without more precise indication; but we are unable to confirm the existence of limestone in the rocks of K^2^.]{.footnote}

[^1306]: [*Teram Kangri*: refer [Teram Kangri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teram_Kangri)]{.footnote}

[^1307]: [W. HUNTER WORKMAN, *Geog. Jour.* 31, 1908, pp. 34 and 394; 32, 1908, p. 139; 34, 1909.
p. 570 Zeit. für Gletscherk. 2. 1907, p. 22; 3. 1909, part 4: also the volumes written by him and MRS. WORKMAN, *Peaks and Glaciers of the Nun Kun.* London 1909; *The Call of the Snowy Hispar.* London 1910, etc.]{.footnote}

[^1308]: [16,512 feet on the map. For the discrepancy in the figures see the discussion of the altimetric data in Chapter XIX.]{.footnote}
