# CHAPTER XIV<br /> THE SAVOIA GLACIER AND PASS. {#fourteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Duke's new Plan. — The Camp moved to the West of K^2^. — Going up the Savoia Glacier. —
Preliminary Excursions. — Cold and Bad Weather. — Mountain Climbing, Photography and
Topography. — The Western Wall of K^2^. — Ascent of Savoia Col. — Disappointment. —
Sir Francis Younghusband’s Description of the Northern Wall of K^2^. — Return to the
Base Camp. — A Shortage of Chupattis. — Change in the Appearance of the Godwin Austen.
— Variable Weather. — Sunsets.
<br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_241.jpg ""){#b241}
::::

HAVING concluded the exploration of the southern slope of K^2^, the expedition
turned its attention to the glacier already visited by the Duke which girdles
the base of the mountain to the west. No one else had ever trodden its snows,
and upon the map even the lower part of the valley was scarcely indicated. The
Duke's design was to climb up to the watershed col at the top, with the hope of
examining from that point the northern slopes and the north-western ridge of
K^2^. There was the possibility that alongside and behind this ridge might be a
snowy slope which would offer an easy climb to the peak. The preliminary
expedition would give the opportunity of deciding whether it was possible to
carry a camp up to the saddle. Moreover, if an attempt on this side did not
display any greater chance of success than that on the southern wall, at least
it would enable the Duke to ascertain whether he could cross over the watershed
and reach the northern slopes and the unknown valleys below them. In the
meantime Sella and Negrotto would complete the illustration and survey of the
valley to the west of K^2^.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE MOUTH OF THE SAVOIA GLACIER.](Karakoram_242.jpg "THE MOUTH OF THE SAVOIA GLACIER."){#b242}
::::

The guides and coolies began to move camp on June 4th, only the latter coming
back to the base camp. The next day they left again with the porters, and Sella,
Negrotto and I accompanied them. Our route shows plainly on the map, going
around the foot of the southwestern spur of K^2^, above which rises the fine
snowy peak 22,490 feet high. We descended the right-hand moraine of the Godwin
Austen, full of holes and ridges and covered with stones and moraine detritus,
as far as the end of the spur, skirting the latter across masses of ice heaped
up at its base by avalanches from glaciers hanging 1,000 feet above. Next we
entered the ditch between the glacier and the great wall of metamorphic rock
arranged in almost vertical strata. Our route was that followed by the Duke on
his way back from his first investigation of the western side of K^2^. It is the
only one that could be taken by the coolies, who would be badly oft among the
dangerous séracs of the centre part of the glacier, by which the Duke had made
his ascent. We went up rather fast, now in the bottom of the trough between
glacier and rock, now on the side of one or the other, often exposed to falling
stones or ice from cither side. The brow of the glacier was all ragged with
séracs of the strangest shapes, with stalactites hanging down like long
heards—hollowed out, pierced through and eaten away by melting, and often poised
over our heads at very uncomfortable angles. In the lower part of the ascent
were some small marginal lakes, covered with thick ice. Higher up our way became
a regular climb up a sort of couloir, half rock and half ice. At the top of it
we stopped to let the coolies rest. They had gone well over the difficult
ground, despite their burdens. The whole climb was a little over 600 feet.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![TERMINAL CASCADE OF THE SAVOIA.](Karakoram_243.jpg "TERMINAL CASCADE OF THE SAVOIA."){#b243}
::::

We had not yet gone all the way around the spur, from which descend great
radiating ridges. The terminal fall of the glacier faces directly eastward, and
we had now before us the second part, rising at an easier pitch toward the
north-west. Looking back we had a magnificent view of Broad Peak, picturesquely
swathed in mist, and of the dizzy heights between it and the Gasherbrum range,
dominating cliffs of rock and snow cut into innumerable furrows by avalanches.
On the right of the valley extends a row of jutting peaks, six of which are
20,000 feet high or over. In front of us the glacier rises at a moderate slope,
with numerous crevices, which, however, were narrow and easily crossed. Nearly
all their fragile snow bridges had been broken through by yesterday’s party.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![A SÉRAC AT THE EDGE OF THE SAVOIA GLACIER.](Karakoram_244.jpg "A SÉRAC AT THE EDGE OF THE SAVOIA GLACIER."){#b244}
::::

Before long we reached the upper basin of the valley, a wide plateau facing the
north, of a pure whiteness never seen in the Alps except in the first hours
after a snowfall. The glacier was covered with thick snow, but the track beaten
by the coolies the day before was perfectly good and saved us much trouble.
Botta, however, though he was carrying a light load, did not hold out through
the march. He seemed exhausted, and we were obliged to leave him behind on a
mass of fallen rock to wait for the coolies who were to go back on the same day
to the base camp. He had not entirely recovered his strength since the attack of
fever at Rdokass, though he had been relieved of heavy work and
his appetite and sleep were normal. A longer experience convinced me that at
these heights the system readjusts itself only very slowly after any
disturbance, however slight.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![WESTERN WALL OF BROAD PEAK FROM THE TOP OF THE TERMINAL CASCADE OF THE SAVOIA.](Karakoram_245.jpg "WESTERN WALL OF BROAD PEAK FROM THE TOP OF THE TERMINAL CASCADE OF THE SAVOIA."){#b245}
::::

We had now gone all the way around the spur. Alongside us a glacier comes down
from a narrow snowy col (Negrotto Pass), the same which on its other side
overlooks the base camp. Just below this was erected the Whymper tent brought up
the day before. Not far from us a rocky crest stands out above the glacier,
dividing the western wall of K^2^. It rises to its very summit in a series of
great steps, defined by large towers. 1t is this crest which is outlined against
the sky and forms the western side of the pyramid as seen from the south. The
encampment is thus separated from the base camp only by the southwestern ridge
of K^2^, a horizontal distance of less than two and a half miles. It is,
however, 1,664 feet higher up. We had hardly covered half of the glacier basin,
and were still a considerable distance from the end of the valley; for the
coolies, having reached this spot at about two o’clock on the previous day,
tired out with marching on the soft snow and having still to get back that day
to the base camp, had refused to go any farther.

We found the tent deserted, the guides having spent the day exploring a route to
the col. It looked very close to us, but we were misled, as usual, by the
deceptive appearance of the glaciers in this region. Presently we descried far
off on the level the tiny moving figures of the returning party. It had taken
them more than five hours to reach the foot of the col, and they had found the
wall very steep and covered with live ice, making the undertaking look very
different indeed from its aspect as considered from below. We sent the coolies
back to the base camp.

At this height—18,176 feet—we not only found ourselves in perfect condition, but
could actually breathe more easily here than at the base camp. The latter,
situated as it was in a sort of hollow between the glacier and the rock, had
perhaps a little less active circulation of air. We had had a west wind all day,
and towards evening it became a hurricane. The weather was very severe, the
thermometer falling in the night to 5° F. The storm was not over by morning, but
the guides went off notwithstanding, hoping to make their way farther up the
slope of the col than they had succeeded in doing the day before. On coming out
of our tents we found a pair of crows from the colony at the base camp, walking
about over the snow, their feathers all ruffled by the wind. We took shelter
again almost at once, for it was too intensely cold to stand about outside, and
nearly all the mountains were covered with mist, preventing any topographical
work. The guides returned at 10 o’clock, driven back by the blinding tourmente.
Little by little, however, it subsided, and the solar radiation became so
intense that we almost regretted the cold of a few hours previous. The actual
temperature was only 28° F., but the solar thermometer registered 142° F., the
highest record we noted on the glaciers with one exception throughout the
campaign, though considerably lower than some observed by other explorers in the
Karakoram, of which I will speak farther on.^[^1401]^

At 11 o’clock the Duke joined us, and an hour afterwards the coolies arrived
with the remaining loads, going back immediately. Three of them stopped
half-way, among the rocks above the cascade of séracs, where they had placed a
tent, a few provisions and a little wood. They were to facilitate our
communications with the base camp below, where Botta had remained on guard.

The wind came up again towards evening from the north-west. The air was
wonderfully clear. One after another the peaks were lighted up by the last rays
of the sun. The monster beside us, in full sunlight, was surmounted by a great
tuft of rosy storm-cloud. On the ridges the wind lifted the snow in columns of
tourmente, or stirred up squalls that filled the air of the valley with
crystalline dust. Again the thermometer went swiftly downward, and the cold,
sharpened by the wind, soon became so unbearable that we took refuge in the
tents. Their walls shook all night in the gale, but towards morning its fury
slackened, and when we rose at five o’clock on June 7th we found a perfectly
still air and a temperature of 5° F.

At half-past five the Duke set out with three guides, having decided to try to
reach the ridge of the col the same day. The four porters remained with us, and
we soon got under way with the tacheometer, photogrammetric and photographic
apparatus, to take advantage of every minute of the propitious day. We climbed
obliquely up the valley towards its right wall, which is overhung by precipitous
heights of 23,000 feet, from which large glaciers come down into the basin.
Sella betook himself to a prominent icy hummock above us; but we could not get
very near the base of the wall, covered as it was with broken ice clinging
insecurely to the steep incline. In fact, we had just set up the photogrammetric
camera, when a huge mass of séracs detached itself and came down with tremendous
force. We were saved by a depression in the surface of the glacier, which
deflected the course of the moving mass.

What we now had before us was the scene pictured in panorama
[E](https://flic.kr/p/2niqk1k). Here, too, the whole landscape was nothing but a
mere setting for K^2^, which dominates every near-by object. We could see its
entire west wall, splotched with snow, but so steep that no glacier could cling
to it. Between the base and the peak there is little more than a mile of
horizontal distance, and nearly 10,000 feet of perpendicular. The arrangement of
the rock in slightly oblique strata is still more evident here than when seen
from the southern side. The north-western ridge, which bounds the pyramid on the
left, ends with a low group of towers and pinnacles, from which a secondary
ridge runs down to the glacier, bisecting the top of it. West of this group of
rocky crags is the broad, curving, ice-covered saddle which was the goal of the
Duke’s present ascent. On the other side, south-west of the pyramid, stretches
the long ridge which ends in that satellite to the great peak, 22.490 feet high,
which i have already described. Lastly, behind the mountains which close the
basin to the south, a sharp peak of rock just shows its head, the Crystal Peak
of our map.

The small exploring party with the Duke at its head had quickly crossed the
plateau. At the foot of the col, in the rounded bottom of the valley, is a large
map of the glacier, which they skirted on the left, going along the trough
between it and the valley wall, where they went in above their knees in the
heaped-up snow. In less than four hours they reached the foot of the slope,
which was cut by a large *bergschrund*. The latter was easy to cross, as it was
half full of snow fallen from the height above.

Now began the attack on the wall. For a little distance at the bottom it was
covered with snow, which made a solid footing. But this grew thinner and
thinner, until there was nothing over the bare ice but a dry powdery laver,
without any compactness. From the camp, to which we had returned after our work,
we watched with the telescope the slow ascent of the climbing party. The
diminutive figures, separated by long lengths of rope, one almost vertically
above another on the wall of ice, betrayed the steepness of the pitch. They went
straight up, very slowly, climbing the long ascent which the head guide was
cutting as he went in the hard ice. About half-way up was a projection of rock,
to the right of which the climbing party passed without deviating from their
course. The clear, calm day was greatly in their favour. At a quarter past five
in the afternoon, after almost twelve hours of effort, the ridge was conquered,
at a point to the right of the col and somewhat higher. The Fortin barometer
registered 13.740 ins. with a temperature of 16° F. The altitude calculated from
the photogrammetric survey was 21,870 feet.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![Western Wall of K^2^ from the Savoia Glacier.](Karakoram_248.jpg "Western Wall of K^2^ from the Savoia Glacier."){#b248}
::::

The watershed proved to have on its northern side a broad cornice prolonged to
the right in such a way as to cut off completely the view of the northern slope
of K^2^. Below the col to westward they could just make out the wall descending
toward the north and disappearing vertically from view. And that was all. As a
reward of his labours
the Duke thus saw utterly annihilated the hopes with which he had begun the
ascent.

It is possible that Sir Francis Younghusband saw this saddle, as well as the
northern wall of K^2^, when he came over the Mustagh pass from the north in
September, 1887. According to his map the col would belong to a little valley
running into the Sarpo Laggo, a tributary of the Oprang, one of the mamn
affluents of the Yarkand river. Sir Francis Younghusband described K^2^ as he
saw it from the Sarpo Laggo valley, somewhat more than 12 miles away. On the
northern side, “where it is literally clothed in glacier, there must have been
from 14,000 to 16,000 feet of solid ice.”^[^1402]^ He made his description somewhat more
exact in his recent book—"Kashmir"—where he says that he saw K^2^ towering
almost immediately above him, “very abrupt and upstanding. and with immense
masses of ice accumulated at its base.” It is possibly these masses that feed
the glacier which the Duke saw flowing westward at the base of the col. He
could, moreover, ascertain that no large spur detached itself from the northern
slopes of K^2^ and Staircase Peak. Beyond a great valley to the north,
presumably the Oprang, there extend chains of lower mountains without any
glacier of great size.

It was too late for the party to linger upon the col. After about a quarter of
an hour they descended, the ropes making the return so quick that by eight
o’clock they had reached the *bergschrund*, where they found the porters we had
sent to meet them with hot drinks and the Alpine lanterns. At half-past nine
they were at the camp. The rapid march testified to their good condition. They
were not exhausted, despite the sixteen hours of exertion at heights between
18.000 and nearly 22,000 feet. The excursion to the western side of K^2^ had not
revealed any feasible way of ascent to the peak, but it had enabled the Duke to
locate upon the map a great tributary valley to the Godwin Austen. He gave the
name Savoia to the new glacier and the pass.

Next morning, June 8th, Sella, Negrotto and I began the return march of the
expedition, with five coolies who had come up from the base camp. When we
reached the bend of the glacier just above it last cascade, we left the path to
make a photogrammetric station in the centre of the valley. We had to go
backwards and forwards a great deal to escape the numerous broad crevasses, and,
as usual, we lost considerable time in experimenting upon methods for preventing
the ice from melting under the points of the tripod supporting the camera and
thus destroying the level laboriously attained. The slow and ceaseless progress
of the melting was revealed by the level in the apparatus, even when we set up
the latter on the stones of the moraine. The only surface stable enough for our
purpose was that of the large boulders, and these were unfortunately of rare
occurrence. Since our return a simple device has been suggested to me, which I
set down here for the benefit of any one in a similar difficulty. Put the points
of the tripod into milk-tins filled with a mixture of ice and salt, which will
keep congealed the ice or snow directly beneath it, and ensure a stable
equilibrium for the apparatus long enough to execute the panorama.

Our work done, we went down the ravine and reached the base camp toward sunset.
The Duke joined us the following day, June 9th. It was the warmest day we had
had, and without a breath of wind. The gentle, even murmur of the rivulets
running down the moraine slopes near by suited well with the summer calm. Even
the cawing of the crows sounded subdued.

For the first time the provisions for the coolies were late in arriving. and
there was a scarcity of chupattis. The coolies ended by submissively accepting
some of our biscuits to fill out their ration, and even some roast mutton, when
we had convinced them that it had been prepared at Rdokass by people of their
own religion and caste. They also found a little sack of flour, which they ate
raw with great gusto. Fresh provisions reached us on the 11th, and with them
five extra coolies sent for by the Duke to help shift the camp from one place to
another.

Everything was brought down from the Savoia glacier, and we made ready for the
next move. We stayed at the base camp four days. I noted at this time, and on
similar occasions, that during such days of idleness one feels often a little
heavy-headed, and experiences some loss of sleep and appetite. I imagine that
moderate exercise, by enabling the processes of nutrition and metabolism to go
on with more rapidity, facilitates the elimination of noxious products, which
are either not so easily converted or remain in the system in larger quantities
at these heights than in the conditions of atmospheric pressure under which we
normally live.
 
In the sixteen days since our arrival at the base camp the appearance of the
lower Godwin Austen had changed considerably, notwithstanding the continual
alternation of good and had weather. From the foot of K^2^ down to the Concordia
its surface was now quite free of snow, rough and full of sharp points, and
traversed by long ridges of ice between the wide streaks of moraine, which had
become low and flattened. The rocky walls were baring themselves—the snow was
confined to scattered patches and the glaciers were thus more clearly defined.
The lower spurs of Broad Peak displayed surfaces of inaccessible rock. Mitre
Peak turned toward us a ridge that ran almost vertically from base to summit,
ice-covered on its right side, entirely black on its left.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![MITRE PEAK FROM THE LOWER GODWIN AUSTEN.](Karakoram_251.jpg "MITRE PEAK FROM THE LOWER GODWIN AUSTEN."){#b251}
::::

We had not yet had three consecutive days of fine weather. The wind blew almost
uninterruptedly about the high peaks and ridges, and light falls of snow and
sleet were not infrequent. There was no sign of a change for the better in the
sky or in the barometer, which remained fairly steadily at the same point, with
but slight variations. When the wind turned easterly or northerly it generally
became clear and somewhat calmer, but unfortunately that state of things never
lasted long. We gradually resigned ourselves to taking the weather as it came,
without attempting prophecies always set at naught by the capricious
meteorological conditions.

Twilight was always followed by severe and increasing cold, which arrested alike
the falling stones, snow and e and the currents of water. Profound silence would
brood over the valley, even weighing down our spirits with indefinable
heaviness. There can be no other place in the world where man feels himself so
alone, so isolated, so completely ignored by Nature, so incapable of entering
into communion with her. Every clear evening we enjoyed the triumphant spectacle
of Bride Peak, displaying herself in immaculate purity among a cortege of
bridesmaids all arrayed m virgin white. Her northern wall seemed to gather and
reflect all the last brilliance of the dying day, and gleamed resplendently
white against a cold blue sky, which toward the zenith became itself pale almost
to whiteness.

:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1401]: [See Chapter XIX.]{.footnote}

[^1402]: [SIR F. E. YOUNGHUSBAND. Proc. Roy, Geog, Soc. N. S. X. 1888. p. 785]{.footnote}


