# CHAPTER XV.<br /> THE UPPER GODWIN AUSTEN GLACIER AND THE EASTERN SLOPES OF K^2^. {#sixteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Length and Situation of the Godwin Austen Glacier. —  The Gorge between K^2^ and
Broad Peak. — The First Step of the Glacier. — Survey and Map of the
Eckenstein-Pfannl Guillarmod Expedition. — The Glacier Basin of Broad Peak.  —
The Speed of the Godwin Austen. — Avalanches from Broad Peak. — The Eastern Wall
and North-Eastern Spur of K^2^. — Staircase Peak. — Two Ascents to Sella Pass. —
The Region East of the Broad-Gasherbrum Range. — Teram Kangri. — The Ascent to
Windy Gap. — The Attempt of Guillarmod and Wessely on K^2^. — The Basin of
Staircase Peak. — ”Border Saddle.” — K^2^ from Windy Gap. —— The Region East of
the Col. — The Duke at Windy Gap. — First Attempt on Staircase Peak. — Snowfalls
and Avalanches. — Second Attempt. — K^2^ from the Ridge of Staircase Peak. —
Observations on the Region east of the Baltoro. <br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_253.jpg ""){#b253}
::::

WE had still to explore the upper basin of the Godwin Austen and the eastern
slopes of K^2^—a work which occupied the next fifteen days of the campaign.

According to the survey made by the expedition, the Godwin Austen from the
Concordia to Windy Gap^[^1507]^ is twelve and a half miles long, and divided into two
nearly equal parts, the lower of which I have already described. It runs north,
loaded with moraine, and rises about 820 feet in the six miles between the
Concordia and the foot of K^2^ From this point on the glacier runs north-east,
in a deep gorge between K^2^ and Broad Peak. It has no longer any surface
moraine, and it gains some 3,950 feet of altitude in six and a half miles,
chiefly by means of two great rises or steps, between which is a relatively
level space.

The Duke foresaw that the new enterprise would be of some duration, and arranged
to set up a camp suitable for several days’ sojourn between the base camp and
the upper glacier. It took only three days for our augmented force of coolies to
carry to the chosen spot three of the large tents, the Whymper and Mummery
tents, a good part of the coolies’ encampment and all the necessary supplies.
The first party of guides, porters and coolies started on June 12th, all of them
except the guides returning the same day. Sella, Negrotto and I joined the party
on the second day; and on the third—June 14th the Duke arrived with the coolies
who carried the last part of the luggage.

We came out of our base camp and upon the moraine at the end of the southern
glacier of K^2^, beyond which the Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition had
set up its Camp IX. We could still see some remains of shelter walls built by
them. The glacier was nearly level, with few cracks and almost free of snow. It
runs at the bottom of a gorge perhaps three-quarters of a mile wide, between the
tremendous walls of K^2^ and Broad Peak, over 8,000 feet above it. Threatening
ice clings high aloft along these walls, and the Godwin Austen is scattered with
masses of rock and large fragments of ice from avalanches that have fallen from
both sides and come out across the valley almost as far as the opposite wall.
There would be no escape for a party surprised by one of these avalanches, and
it would be foolhardy indeed to attempt the passage directly after a heavy
snowfall.

The first steep of the glacier begins at the base of the southern ridge of K^2^,
by which the Duke had already attempted to reach the summit. The grade is
moderately steep, broken in every direction by crevasses, most of them covered
with treacherous snow. We found it necessary to put on the ropes. At the top of
the short ascent the glacier again becomes almost level for a little stretch,
forming a terrace 18,370 feet in altitude, covered with a thick layer of snow
and full of crevasses. We had been approaching the left side of the valley, and
we reached this level not far from a rocky spur that comes down toward us from
the northern summit of Broad Peak. This was the site of the
Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition’s Camp X.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Broad Peak from Camp VI.](Karakoram_254.jpg "Broad Peak from Camp VI."){#b254}
::::

At this point Conway’s map leaves off. In surveying the valley, from Fan Pass in
the Crystal Peak chain, about seven and a half miles distant, it looked to him
as though the brow of this little plateau might be the top of a col (Possible
Saddle). The Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition discovered and explored the
upper basin of the Godwin Austen, and put the site of the watershed much farther
toward the north-cast, at Windy Gap.

Guillarmod’s narrative is accompanied by a map of the Baltoro, on a scale of 1&nbsp;:&nbsp;200,000, 
which reproduces that of Conway in its general lines, with the addition
of the upper Godwin Austen.^[^1501]^ He does not describe the methods employed in the
survey, but the map of the new part, despite its appearance of exactness and its
being furnished with contours, is only an approximate sketch, in which the
outlines of the mountains, the lateral valleys and the confluent glaciers are so
altered that it is difficult to identify them when one is on the spot. Without
going into detail, it is sufficient to instance that the upper basin of the
Godwin Austen is represented as over nine miles long (from Conway’s Possible
Saddle to Windy Gap), whereas it actually measures less than four miles; that
the horizontal distance between Windy Gap and K^2^ is given as nearly 10½ miles
instead of 4½ miles; and that the bearing of the valley is incorrect. The
altimetric figures of Guillarmod are generally considerably in excess of the
ones measured by us.

The following instances will suffer

|<small>Place.</small>| <small>Heights determined Heights by the expedition of the Duke.</small>|<small>Heights given in Guillarmod's map tables and text.</small>|
|---|:---:|:---:|
|Mitre Peak| 20,462|24,600|
|Broad Peak| 27,132|28,000|
|Staircase|24,078|26,250|
|Mustagh Tower|23,950-24,950|26,250|
|Rdokass|13,205|13,904|
|Camp X|18,350|18,733|
|Windy Gap|20,449|21,500|

Dr. Pfannl, whose name is not mentioned in the title of the
Eckenstein-Knowles-Guillarmod map, published with his account of the expedition^[^1503]^
a sketch of the upper part of the Godwin Austen, mentioning that it is only
approximate, and probably bears too much to the north—as is, in fact, the case.
Except for the exaggeration in the width of the ¢lacier, this drawing is nearer
the actual dimensions of the valley than the map published by Guillarmod. The
outline of the chains and ridges is also more nearly correct.

Our predecessors stayed in the upper Godwin Austen for a month, from June 20th
to July 21st, 1902. They suffered much from bad weather. However, the two
Austrian doctors, Pfannl and Wessely, were able to make numerous exploring
expeditions, which I mention in the course of my narrative. Dr. Pfannl was
seized on July 15th by a somewhat serious hing trouble, and the expedition was
obliged to put an end to its campaign and return home.

From the northern summit of Broad Peak (26,017 feet) the left side of the valley
makes a wide circuit to the south-east, circumscribing a circular basin over a
mile in diameter, filled with a level glacier which flows into the intermediate
plateau of the Godwin Austen. We crossed the mouth of this tributary, and at the
base of the spur which bounds it on the right we found the camp set up on a
level strip of moraine with a little frozen marginal lake near by. This was the
Camp VI of our map, 18,602 feet above sea level. The Duke kept twelve of the
coolies with us at this camp, the others returning with Bareux to the base, to
keep up our communications with Rdokass.

In the ascent to the camp the Duke had made an interesting discovery. Below the
plateau, at the base of the rise in the glacier, he found half buried in the ice
two mallets used for driving in tent pickets, some kiltas with the bottoms
knocked out, some single snowshoes and several empty provision boxes. These were
all articles left behind at Camp X by our predecessors (Guillarmod mentions the
incident in his book) when, after weeks of struggle against bad weather and
under serious anxiety over their sick comrade, they took the return route,
carrying him on a sledge improvised out of skis. In the interval of seven years
the cast-off objects had been carried down the glacier to nearly a mile below
the spot marked Camp X on Guillarmod’s map. One may accordingly argue an average
yearly speed of 702 feet for the glacier, much less than that calculated by our
expedition on the Baltoro at the level of Rdokass.

The camp faced the wall which terminates Broad Peak to the north, the wildest
and most impressive bastion one could possibly imagine, a series of vertical
cliffs of rock dominated by blue walls of ice 1,000 feet high, which represent
sections of the northern glaciers of Broad Peak. They slide along unceasingly on
those tremendous steps, shoving their edges farther and farther over the abyss
until finally the weight conquers the cohesiveness of the mass, and enormous
pieces break off and hurl themselves down to the bottom of the amphitheatre with
a deafening crash sound a roar that makes the valley tremble. Long echoes of the
tumult come back from the mountain walls, and from where we are we can feel the
cold breath of the avalanche like a great gust of wind. Day and night every few
hours this thunder reverberates, and in the intervals the mind unconsciously
remains in suspense, waiting for another downfall. The wall is dominated by the
northern summit of Broad Peak, which looks pointed from this side. To its left,
just behind the ridge, rises the rounded centre peak, the highest of the three.
Five other peaks rise along the circular wall of the basin, between 23,222 and
20,981 feet high.  Our camp is at the base of the fifth and lowest.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![EASTERN SIDE OF K^2^ AS SEEN FROM CAMP VI.](Karakoram_258.jpg "EASTERN SIDE OF K^2^ AS SEEN FROM CAMP VI."){#b258}
::::

The appearance of K^2^ is quite changed; it has become a mountain of ice. Its
shape is that of a regular cone comprised between the southern ridge already
attempted by the Duke, and a secondary one, ice-covered, which descends to the
bottom of the valley in front of the great north-cast spur. The apex of this
cone is really formed by the edge of the eastern shoulder of the mountain, which
obscures the outline of the main peak. The whole cone is covered with ice, above
which just show the low, little accentuated rocky ridges converging to the top.
The wall, at a very steep angle of inclination, is live ice for 7,000 feet up,
and crowned by séracs. It is absolutely inaccessible. The north-east buttress
detaches itself from the broad curving shoulder, also entirely ice-covered, and
takes up a good share of the right side of the valley, which is rugged with
teeth and gendarmes and surmounted by some goodly peaks, and ends more than two
and a half miles from K^2^, in the snowy dome which Guillarmod and Wessely
attempted to climb from the Godwin Austen. At no point of the entire distance is
there a place where one could gain the ridge directly from the glacier.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![CAMP VI AND STAIRCASE PEAK.](Karakoram_258a.jpg "CAMP VI AND STAIRCASE PEAK."){#b258}
::::

The farthest height, at the head of the valley, is Staircase Peak (24,078 feet),
of which we see the south-western face, a rocky vertical triangle nearly 4,000
feet high. Between it and the ridge that runs toward it from K^2^ is another
glacial basin, which empties by a narrow mouth into the Godwin Austen; it is
like the basin below Broad Peak, but much smaller. From Staircase Peak to Windy
Gap a rib of ice descends by a series of steps or leaps, its side traversed by
glaciers and furrowed by deep channels; and this rib, together with Windy Gap
itself, terminates the valley of the Godwin Austen. From our camp we can see
neither the saddle nor the left wall of the valley.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![K^2^ as seen from the East, on the Rocks above Camp VI.](Karakoram_259.jpg "K^2^ as seen from the East, on the Rocks above Camp VI."){#b259}
::::

During several days we only saw this or that portion of the panorama I have
described, according to the caprice of the wind, which would tear away the cloud
masses here and there, letting in a rift of sunlight speedily obscured again by
the marshalling of the cold mists or a fresh onset of snow or sleet. I have
already mentioned that the Duke had noted from the southern ridge of K^2^ a
depression in the circle of mountains around the amphitheatre of Broad Peak, and
had formed a project of climbing up to it for a glimpse of the region cast of
the Gasherbrums. This was undertaken on June 15th. The depression is in the
northern wall of the amphitheatre, between peaks 22,306 and 20,981 feet, beneath
the second of which our camp was stationed. It was necessary to round the base
of this peak and enter the glacier basin in order to reach the bottom of the
couloir, by which one could ascend to the col. Three guides accompanied the
Duke. They found the level surface of glacier filling the basin to he cut in
every direction by cracks which were covered over with treacherous powdery snow,
not firm enough to walk on. They had hardly got past the entrance when Alessio
Brocherel broke through one of these snow bridges and fell heavily into a
fissure. The rope went taut, giving him a violent wrench in the chest. It did
not seem at the time to be more than an ordinary incident of mountain climbing,
not serious enough to interrupt the march, but it was the probable cause of much
later suffering for him. The wall itself proved to have a good layer of firm
snow, upon which the party could ascend with the crampons without needing to cut
steps. In three hours they reached the saddle, about 2,000 feet above camp. By
good fortune the air was clear, as well as the sky beyond the col, whereas the
ranges of the Godwin Austen were largely in fog. It was impossible to stay long
on the top, because of the intense cold and violent wind, but before returning
the Duke was able to make observations of many details of the region east of the
saddle.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![FIRST STEP OF THE GODWIN AUSTEN GLACIER, AND SELLA PASS.](Karakoram_260.jpg "FIRST STEP OF THE GODWIN AUSTEN GLACIER, AND SELLA PASS."){#b260}
::::

In order to avoid repetition later on I will interrupt the chronological
narrative here, and mention a second visit to the col, made by Sella, with one
of the porters and a coolie, seven days later, on June 22nd. He went beyond the
ridge, crossing obliquely the eastern slope of the mountain, which was strewn
with small rocky detritus covered by a crust of thin transparent ice. He stopped
at a point where the Gasherbrum range came into view on the south, about half a
mile from the saddle and somewhat lower down; and here he took panorama [F](https://flic.kr/p/2niw1X5), from
a ledge on the ridge that runs down south-east from peak 22,339, It was a labour
of two hours, rendered doubly arduous by the strong wind. He regained the col
with some difficulty, having to contend with squalls of fearful severity.
Wonderful to say, the coolies endured all this without a single complaint. With
the help of panorama F it is possible to get an idea, if not of the topography,
at least of the general aspect of the region east of the Baltoro basin, a region
into which but one single explorer, Sir Francis Younghusband, has ever
penetrated, and he only for a short distance, in 1889.

As far as the eye can see, there is a succession of glacier-filled valleys and
rocky and snowy chains. One can neither see nor guess at the situation of the
lower valleys, where there must be torrents and rivers running. From the pass,
which the Duke named after Vittorio Sella, a glacier flows southward in a wide
valley, bounded on its right by an ice-covered spur radiating from one of the
peaks of the amphitheatre, and on its left by a short ridge surmounted by a fine
rocky pyramid, which detaches itself at right angles from peak 22,995 of the
eastern side of the Godwin Austen. As far as could be judged from above, the
descent on the farther side of Sella Pass did not look difficult, provided the
glacier did not terminate in a cascade of séracs. This pass seemed, in fact, to
be the only way of exit from the Godwin Austen basin that did not present
serious obstacles.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![TERAM KANGRI FROM THE EASTERN SIDE OF SELLA PASS.](Karakoram_261.jpg "TERAM KANGRI FROM THE EASTERN SIDE OF SELLA PASS."){#b261}
::::

To the south the scene is dominated by a group of splendid mountains, among
which are the eastern peaks of the Gasherbrums I (Hidden Peak), II and III. From
this last a great steep spur runs out northward, just indicated upon our map.
This spur, taken together with the eastern walls of Broad Peak, encloses a wide
valley filled with a broad glacier bare of moraine. At the foot of the col this
glacier bends to the north-east to mingle with another and even larger one,
covered with moraine, which comes down cast of the great ridge of Gasherbrum III
just mentioned, and seems to flow north-east, gathering up several affluents
from among the spurs of the Gasherbrums, on its course toward a distant chain of
lofty mountains laden with ice and snow. Three peaks of this chain, marked X, Y
and Z on the panorama, were distinguished by the Duke from Staircase Peak. as i
shall describe shortly. Almost in the centre of the picture, behind all the
succession of ranges, rises a peak of evidently exceptional height. Sella took
the horizontal angle of it with the surveying compass. From the situation, shape
and appearance of this peak, there can be no reasonable doubt that it is Teram
Kangri, the mountain discovered and measured by Dr. Longstaff from the upper
Siachen glacier on June 17th, only five days before Sella photographed it.^[^1504]^

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![STAIRCASE PEAK AND THE END OF THE NORTH-EASTERN SPAR OF K^2^.](Karakoram_262.jpg "STAIRCASE PEAK AND THE END OF THE NORTH-EASTERN SPAR OF K^2^."){#b262}
::::

I will now resume the narrative from June 14th, on which day the Duke had sent
ahead Sella, Negrotto and myself to set up a light camp at Windy Gap. Lorenzo
Petigax, Emilio Brocherel and twelve coolies formed our escort, and we were
roped together in two long files. The morning was cold and windy, with a thick
atmosphere. We climbed up the left side of the glacier, in the furrow next the
wall, reaching in a few minutes the top of the second level. The drop of the
glacier beside us was cut by broad crevasses, typically V-shaped, with the apex
pointing downwards. We went gradually toward the centre of the valley to get out
of range of possible avalanches from the glaciers hanging on the steep walls of
the left side. This wall runs fairly straight, without marked side valleys, and
has only two peaks—22,339 and 22,995 feet in height—from the latter of which a
rounded rocky rib, loaded with ice and snow, descends to Windy Gap. The other
side of the valley is formed by the long north-east buttress of K^2^, a sheer
precipice, all ice and perpendicular cliffs. It ends in a round snow-covered
shoulder, above which towers a sharp pinnacle of rock (peak 22,378 on the map).
At the foot of this peak our predecessors had set up their Camp XI; and thence,
on July 10th, 1902, Wessely and Guillarmod had tried to gain the snowy shoulder,
in the hope of finding a route to K^2^ along the broken and slender
north-eastern ridge. Guillarmod relates that they were greatly embarrassed by
the deep snow, and obliged to turn back after getting within 150 feet of the top
of the shoulder, the aneroid barometer showing a height of 22,000 feet.^[^1505]^

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![STAIRCASE PEAK, THE END OF THE NORTH-EASTERN RIDGE OF K^2^, AND THE OPENING ON STAIRCASE BASIN.](Karakoram_263.jpg "STAIRCASE PEAK, THE END OF THE NORTH-EASTERN RIDGE OF K^2^, AND THE OPENING ON STAIRCASE BASIN."){#b263}
::::

Beyond the north-east ridge of K^2^the valley is broken into by the glacial
basin of Staircase Peak. This basin is so shut in by high and steep walls as to
form a sort of pit or rather an enormous trench. Pfannl and Wessely camped
inside of it, and climbed up a gully in its western wall in an attempt to reach
a depression in the ridge, whence they might be able to examine the northern
side of the north-eastern buttress of K^2^. They were driven back by falling
stones and the steepness of the ice.^[^1506]^ The precipitous walls of Staircase Peak
close in the top of the Godwin Austen, about whose summit the wind was furling
and unfurling veils of mist.

The glacier was of a dense whiteness, without brilliance. Not even on the broken
ice of its walls was to be seen any of the blue-green hue of our Alpine
glaciers. The weather was very severe, and the coolies suffered bitterly.
Whenever we paused they shook with the cold and the cruel wind that penetrated
the loose folds of their garments. We were nearly at the level of the Staircase
basin, and there remained only a last short climb between us and the little flat
space below Windy Gap. Here the coolies stopped and piteously implored us not to
go any farther. One of them flung himself weeping on the snow, pointing to his
aching head and numbed feet. We had his shoes and stockings taken off to make
sure his feet were not frozen. We gave him some caffeine tablets and coaxed him
and the others to go on, less in words than by sympathetic looks and tones, and
by pointing out the near-by goal. We got them on again in a little. As a matter
of fact we were never, throughout the expedition, prevented from going
reasonable distances by any illwill or rebellion on the part of the coolies, and
we learned from experience that the Baltis are much more susceptible to kindness
and persuasion than to threats or violence.

After about another hour of walking, at an easy gait, we reached the foot of the
last slope, above 100 feet high, and in ten minutes more we were on the rocks of
the saddle, which is divided into two unequal parts by a small rocky tooth. It
is prolonged on one side by the southern ridge of Staircase Peak, and on the
other by the rounded flanks of peak 22,995. A villainous wind was blowing. We
scarcely gave a glance down the narrow steep valley beyond the col, through
which a glacier flows to center a larger valley. Beyond the second one rises a
snow-covered range. There was no place on the col to set up a camp, so we went
down the last short ascent and placed the tents near the little bergschrund at
its foot.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![WINDY GAP.](Karakoram_265.jpg "WINDY GAP."){#b265}
::::

The coolies went back at once, accompanied by Savoie. who for the safety of the
party entrusted to his care must, of course, put himself last in the file. The
question was, which of the twelve coolies would be brave enough to march at the
head. After some little excitement one of them volunteered, and they started oft
in their usual good humour.

All day long the storm wind blew furiously, driving fine grains of ice through
every cranny in the tents. The heights were all covered. Later on the wind
lessened somewhat and snow began to fall. Most of the next day, June 15th, we
spent at the top of the ridge, Negrotto and I with the photogrammetric apparatus
on a little rocky ledge south of the col; and Sella on the other side at the
foot ot Staircase Peak, with his photographic equipment—all three of us waiting
In a cutting wind, our teeth chattering, stamping our feet and slapping our
hands together, indulging the vain hope that the sky might clear. The
temperature was not lower than 21° F. or thereabouts; but inactive as we were in
the face of that piercing wind, our suffering was acute. The weather played with
us for hours, partially uncovering now one peak, now another. But toward four
o’clock it grew definitely worse, and drove us back to the tent, where we
prepared our simple meal. A party of coolies, under the escort of Savoie, had
come and gone during the day leaving provisions and supplies.

The pass well deserves the name of Windy Gap given it by Guillarmod. However, I
should mention that Pfannl called it Grenz Sattel (Border Saddle), because it is
the limit of the hydrographic system not only of the Baltoro basin, but of the
Indus as well. Pfannl gives it a height of 20,550 feet, much nearer our figure
of 20,449 feet than the 21,500 feet given on Guillarmod’s map. Dr. Wessely made
a short expedition to the col. being the only one of the party to do so. In
Pfannls sketch a precipitous ice wall is marked to the north of it, and at its
base a large glacier running westward, beyond which is indicated another
mountain chain, the same as that shown on our map. From the route traced in the
sketch it appears that Dr. Wessely went on beyond the col, continuing somewhat
toward the right up to a point marked 21,150 feet.

As if maliciously, the weather turned fine after sunset. The summit of K^2^ was
already in shadow, but from the lofty cone stood up an immense volume of vapour,
more than 3,000 feet high, with wonderful whorls outlined against the sky,
gilded by the sinking sun, whose last rays just reached its topmost part,
perhaps 32,000 or 33,000 feet high.

By way of exception the fine evening did not prove this time to have been a
false prophecy, and on rising next morning we were delighted to behold a
brilliantly clear sky. We lost not a minute in returning to the ridge of the
col, where for the first time we saw the entire eastern face of K^2^ revealed
without a trace of mist.^[^1508]^ It looked like another mountain entirely; and of all
the manifold aspects of the colossus this is certainly the most imposing, the
richest and boldest in design. Alas, it is also such as to annihilate the last
remnant of hope that might linger in the mind of the mountaineer. The cone
itself rises from a great sloping shoulder entirely covered by a glacier that
comes down to its very verge and breaks abruptly off, forming a perpetual menace
to all the ravines, furrows and ridges of the steep wall beneath. The peak,
which from this side looks very sharp, has a huge icy dome on steep coming down
to the edge of a formidable vertical descent of rock; and to this the chance
disposition of the ice and the hollows and protuberances of the rock have given
the semblance of a grotesque face, a sort of demon of the mountains. Below the
shoulder to the south is visible in profile the crest of rock first tried by the
Duke; it is much steeper than it looked from below and very long. The
north-western buttress projects toward us, very sharp, broken and rugged, full
of needles and icy pinnacles, between which run northward the curves of long and
ample cornices. If he had seen it from this point, Guillarmod would never have
thought of choosing it as a route. The end of it joins like the shaft of a T to
a transversal ridge which encircles one of the sides of Staircase basin.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![K^2^ FROM WINDY GAP.](Karakoram_267.jpg "K^2^ FROM WINDY GAP."){#b267}
::::

To the south-west we could look down through the Godwin Austen valley as far as
the point where it bends toward the Concordia. From our point of view the
background is formed by the right-hand ridge of the Savoia glacier, behind
which, 24 miles away, rises Masherbrum Peak, a great rocky mountain,
extraordinarily imposing, terminating in a sharp point. On the left all the
summits along the Godwin Austen look diminished and robbed of significance by
the ponderous bulk of Broad Peak; but the latter is balanced on the north by
the magnificent icy cliffs, like gigantic steps, running from the saddle to the
dome of Staircase Peak. This impressive formation is joined by an almost
horizontal ridge to the top of the triangular wall of rock that faces down the
valley.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![MASHERBRUM FROM THE HEAD OF THE GODWIN AUSTEN.](Karakoram_268.jpg "MASHERBRUM FROM THE HEAD OF THE GODWIN AUSTEN."){#b268}
::::

We are now in a position to satisfy our curiosity more completely with regard to
the country beyond the col to the north-east.^[^1509]^ A glacier descends precipitously
at our feet, falling with almost vertical leaps for about 2,000 feet, then
flowing somewhat less steeply to empty upon another glacier, which is nearly as
large as the Godwin Austen, covered with snow, and soon disappears from view in
a south-easterly direction. On the north this glacier reaches a low snowy col at
the base of the eastern wall of Staircase Peak.^[^1510]^ Its left wall is formed
by a chain of mountains of varied design, the highest of them being twin peaks,
a snowy and a rocky one (22,113 feet). The chain runs from north-west to
south-east, and at half its distance there detaches itself at right angles a
branch which runs to join the eastern ridge of Staircase Peak, by means of the
low col I have mentioned. Finally, above and behind this screen rise here and
there the peaks of still another chain, evidently larger and more important.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![PEAK 22,113, EAST OF WINDY GAP.](Karakoram_269.jpg "PEAK 22,113, EAST OF WINDY GAP."){#b269}
::::

By half-past seven Negrotto had completed a photogrammetric panorama from the
southern extremity of the col. We dismounted the apparatus, traversed the whole
length of the ridge of the col and climbed, partly on ice, partly of rock, to
the foot of the ridge of Staircase Peak. At the base of a sort of turret we made
another station on a little level cut with our pickaxes i the ice near the
cornice. It was from these two panoramas that the short chain north-east of
Windy Gap was placed upon the map. We got down directly to the tents without
going back to the col through a gully full of ice with a light covering of snow.
Sella in the meantime had taken panoramas [G](https://flic.kr/p/2nivUR5) and
(https://flic.kr/p/2niw7EC), and photographs of several single mountains. The
three guides and seven coolies came up presently from the camp below.

Our work at Windy Gap was finished, and we prepared to return to Camp VI,
leaving the tents behind for the use of the Duke. He wished to make the ascent
of Staircase Peak, not so much as a mountaineering feat as because it was
evident that there must be from the top an excellent view of its own
north-western slopes and those of K^2^, as well as of all the unknown territory
lying east of Windy Gap, Broad Peak and the Gasherbrums. If too serious
obstacles offered themselves to an ascent, It might still be possible to descend
to the other side of the col and make an expedition on the glaciers eastward and
southward, or to round Staircase Peak to a point where the northern wall of K^2^
might become visible.

We had been wise to profit by the early morning hours, for it now began to cloud
over again. We returned roped together in three caravans, one formed entirely of
coolies. They had been quick to learn the use of the rope, and also how to avoid
the insidious crevices. Whenever we had once persuaded them to cover new ground,
they returned to it with a good will, never making objections even when the
route was difficult. The reluctance which they sometimes showed was never
laziness or obstinacy, but only fear of the unknown. We conquered it by
persuasion and example. Severity would only have made the case worse.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Staircase Peak from Windy Gap.](Karakoram_270.jpg "Staircase Peak from Windy Gap."){#b270}
::::

On the morning of June 17th the Duke ascended to Windy Gap in his turn. The
guides had reached it the day before, and on that day they went to cut a long
stairway in the ice of the ridge up to the first terrace. Unfortunately it began
to snow in the night and kept on till the day following, making all their work m
vain. On the 19th the weather was exceedingly uncertain, but the Duke went up
the first section of the slope, accompanied by the guides. At the edge of the
plateau rise two well-defined towers, which show plainly in panorama G. It had
begun to snow again, and for five hours the party waited, sheltering themselves
as best they could in the lee of the towers. They saw a little bird hopping
about on the rocks—it seemed lost in this desert of ice. Finally, they had to
give up and go back to the tents. Alessio Brocherel, who had been ailing ever
since his fall two days before, was seized with exhaustion, coughing and acute
pain on the right side of the chest, and the Duke thought it best for him to
return at once to Camp VI, with Emilio Brocherel and Savoie as escort.

In the meantime at Camp V we had spent the three days to no great advantage. On
the 18th Negrotto and I pushed our way through a labyrinth of crevasses, which
obliged us to retrace our footsteps continually, as far as the centre of the
middle level of the Godwin Austen, where we made a photogrammetric station.
Sella was spending whole days of patient waiting, renewing the experience of the
Ruwenzori expedition, on the ledge of a crest some 2,000 feet above camp, where,
crouched beside his machine, he watched for a break in the clouds. The wind kept
up, cold and penetrating, piercing the thickest woollens one could put on; and
whenever it did slacken the air grew sultry, and we experienced such
reverberation from the snow and fog as to suffer more from it than from the
unclouded sun.

The coolies, huddled about their tiny fires, chanted plaintive monotonous little
ditties half under their breaths, sometimes accompanying them by beating time on
the empty provision tins. They had made themselves a whole cooking outfit with
the tins in which the food came. The three coolies who had remained with Bareux
at the base camp came up periodically with our post and with chupattis and
bundles of wood. We were often wakened suddenly at might with palpitating hearts
by the terrible noise of an avalanche from Broad Peak. The echoes would
reverberate for several minutes in the silence of the night with a sound like
ears going at full speed over uneven pavement or the long roar of a passing
train.

At evening on the 19th the sky was more obscured and shut in than ever, and
heavy snow began to fall quietly through a windless atmosphere. The thermometer
registered 19° F. Alessio Brocherel suffered all night long from a dry racking
cough, which aggravated the strain in his side. He had scarcely any fever, but
lie looked weak and worn out. In the absence of any other morbid symptoms, I
believe the case to have been one of a slight and limited traumatic pleurisy,
caused by the wrench from the rope which he had sustained in his fall.

At midday on the 20th the Duke returned to camp. He had not given up his
attempt, but it seemed wisest to wait until the spell of bad weather had broken
and the guides had been able to prepare a route on the ridge of Staircase Peak,
or else downward through the glacier cast of Windy Gap.

Although the heavy snowfall had not sufficed to clear the sky of clouds,
Negrotto and I made a topographical excursion on the glacier as far as the basin
of Staircase Peak. We had hardly set up the instrument when the whole formidable
cast wall of K^2^ seemed to disembarrass itself at one stroke of all the snow
that had fallen in the last days, and an immense avalanche, heralded by a vast
white cloud, flung itself down for nearly 10,000 feet right in our direction.
For an instant we were bewildered, not knowing if the distance would be
sufficient to break the force of this tremendous downfall. But its course became
slower directly it reached the level of the glacier, where it opened out i a
great fan. The cloud of powdery snow filled the entire valley, enveloping us
even where we stood in its dense folds, accompanied by an actual heavy snowfall
which lasted several minutes. It was almost half an hour before the air cleared
sufficiently for us to go on with our work.

We found the sun’s rays very intense on our way back to camp, and there was a
powerful reverberation from the new snow. All the surrounding mountains, as
though they had been awaiting the signal from the monarch, shook off their
burdens, which came down in streams, torrents, rivers of the purest white, and
heaped themselves up at the foot of the walls. After a brief interlude of only a
few hours the weather grew bad again. Broad Peak, always the first to condense
its vapours, speedily covered itself with an enormous cap; thick stormclouds
appeared settling down over all the hills and weighing down the northeastern
buttress of K^2^; and to the west was displayed the “mackerel sky” that always
portends bad weather.

On June 23rd the Duke again rejoined the guides at Windy Gap. He had to go
through a furious storm resembling in character the polar drift. There were in
all five guides and porters with him at Windy Gap—all the forces except Bareux,
Botta and Brocherel. The last, though somewhat better, continued very weak. The
guides had not been able to do much work in the interval. They were driven back
by the wind on two successive days from the ridge of Staircase Peak, not getting
farther than the first terrace. They were of opinion, however, that it would be
easy to find a route up to the second stage of the ascent, though there was no
possibility of attaining the peak in less than three days, which meant three
days of fine weather, a condition up to now without a precedent. They had also
examined the steep glacier cast of the saddle and had planned a descent on its
right margin. The loads would have to be let down through a steep icy well at
the left of the col, a very dubious undertaking and one that would require some
days of work. What the return route would be was an unsolved problem.

On the morning of June 24th, on account of the doubtful look of the weather, the
Duke had decided to give up the ascent and try the way down the eastern glacier
of Windy Gap. But a change for the better induced him to return, take the two
Mummery tents, four sleeping-bags, some provisions and cooking utensils, and set
off with all speed for the ridge of Staircase Peak. He went up the sloping ice
wall toward the two rocky towers that guard the edge of the first level,
crossing over on the snow just below these to reach the brow of the terrace or
little rolling snowy plateau, upon which he set up the small camp in a sheltered
hollow.

The two Petigax and Enrico Brocherel stayed with him, Emilio Brocherel and
Savoie returning to Windy Camp. During the night Enrico Brocherel, an uncommonly
robust man, with the physique of an athlete, was taken with coughing, from no
apparent cause, had pains in the breast, and spit blood. In the morning he
wished to go on with the others, but his cough grew worse, and alarmed by the
unusual symptoms he was obliged to give it up. The illness was unexplainable,
for no further evil results followed, and later on, in the much higher camps of
Chogolisa Saddle, he always felt perfectly well. The appearance of clear and
serene weather made the mishap all the more vexing. Despite it, the Duke did not
hesitate to set off with the two Petigax, with the intention of getting as far
as possible up the ridge. They wore two sets of woollens for protection against
the stinging cold, and their feet and legs were wound with heavy cloth kept in
place by the straps from the crampons. It took about an hour to cross the
plateau, full of large furows and snowy ridges. Thence they climbed the gentle
slope to the foot of the second step and began the attack upon it. It was
covered with dry snow with the bare ice shining through here and there. After
some three hours of work with the pickaxes they reached a point very near the
top, where the wall began curving on to the edge of the second terrace. Here
they were confronted by a wide crevasse, the edges of which were particularly
unsafe from melting. It cut the steep slope at right angles in such a way that
its upper edge was several yards higher and receded by about the same amount
more than the lower. The guides followed along the edge going toward the left,
and Lorenzo, standing on his father’s shoulders, tried in vain to gain the upper
edge. Then they went to the right, and finally found a spot where the edges were
close enough together to permit them to cross. But once beyond it they found
themselves on a strip of ice only a few yards across, separating them from
another huge crevasse, 20 or 30 feet broad, which went all the way across the
slope to where the side walls went down right and left into the valley. There
was no getting around this obstacle; it formed an absolute barrier to further
progress. To go all the way around it on the right one would have to climb an
almost vertical wall of live ice exposed to falls of threatening séracs. It
might be possible to pass it on the left by climbing on the rocks some 700 feet
below the ridge. Midday was already at hand, and it would be necessary to make a
camp and begin again the next day. Added to all this the Duke, for the first and
only time in the campaign, felt very weary, and the endurance of young Lorenzo
was sorely taxed. As for his father, Giuseppe, this indomitable man appeared
insensible to altitude, to cold or to fatigue. He was never found wanting or
known to feel a moment of weakness throughout all the campaigns upon which he
accompanied the Duke, and probably found a source of strength in the silent
devotion which he manifested toward our leader.

Rather than waste the time in doubtful trials, to gain, perhaps, another hundred
yards, the Duke determined to derive the utmost profit from the work already
accomplished, by making a thorough observation of the wide horizon which his
present station (21.650 feet high) enabled him to embrace. He had a splendid
view of K^2^, which always showed itself more lofty, more threatening and more
inaccessible the higher one’s point of view, as if to mock at any competition
with itself. The photograph which the Duke took of it that morning from the
shelter camp, reproduced in the frontispiece of this hook, is undoubtedly the
best picture of K^2^ boasted by the expedition.

From his station on the ridge the Duke took panorama
[I](https://flic.kr/p/2niyw2W), which is important from the illustrative as well
as from the geographical point of view. As usual K^2^ dominates the scene, showing
its terminal cone in its true proportions, covered with a heavy coat of ice on
the east and south, and having a steep smooth angle of rock on the north, which
ends more than 3,000 feet below the summit by merging into the northern wall.
The latter falls precipitously behind the north-east ridge, certainly the
nearest to the perpendicular of all the faces of the mountain. Farther off and
lower down another rocky ridge shows itself against the sky, in all probability
part of the smaller north-western ridge that runs down to Savoia Pass. If so,
the Duke had now completed the circuit of exploration of K^2^ He might now
abandon the struggle the consciousness that he had left undone nothing within
human power to convince himself of the impossiblity of the undertaking.

The Godwin Austen valley, which looked so broad when we were going through it,
shows in the panorama a mere cut or gorge between the walls of K^2^ and Broad
Peak. Masherbrum in the distance has lost much of its imposing appearance.
Gasherbrum II and II are just visible behind the left wall of the Godwin Austen
valley.

Toward the east comes the most interesting part of the panorama, geographically
speaking. The short chain of which Negrotto made a survey, and which appears on
our map, has sunk down quite low, the southern summits just showing. On the
other hand the lofty chain, some peaks of which were to be seen from Windy Gap
showing behind the nearer range, now reveals itself in its entirety. It was
possible, thanks to the three characteristic peaks marked X, Y and Z on the
panorama, to identity this chain with the one which extends on the left in
Sella’s panorama [F](https://flic.kr/p/2niw1X5), taken on June 22nd from behind
the eastern ridge of the Godwin Austen. The glacier which flows eastward at the
base of Windy Gap empties after a short course into another larger one, almost
free of moraine; and of this glacier one sees a tiny triangular portion in
panorama [I](https://flic.kr/p/2niyw2W), apparently flowing south-east. By
comparing the two panoramas F and I one can see that this glacier must join the
large one, entirely covered with loose moraine, of which one sees a stretch in
panorama F, and to which contribute a large number of affluents from the eastern
wall of Broad Peak and the Gasherbrums.^[^1511]^

Having finished their observations the little party quickly returned to the
shelter tents. Shortly afterwards they were joined from below by the two
porters, and with their help descended to Windy Gap, taking the small quantity
of luggage. They all rested next day—Lorenzo Petigax still feeling some fatigue,
and also Enrico Brocherel. The former had a slightly frost-bitten foot. On the
27th the Duke sent these two to the base camp with Emilio Brocherel, and on the
28th he himself left Windy Gap and rejoined the rest of the party.
:::

:::: align-center
****
::::


#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1501]: [The map is constructed “d’aprés les donnécs existantes et les documents de l' expédition rapportés par O. Eckenstein, G. Knowles and Dr. J. Jacot Guillarmod.”]{.footnote}

[^1503]: [*Zeit. des deutsch. u. oest. Alpenver.,* 35, 1904, p. 88.]{.footnote}

[^1504]: [ T. G. LONGSTAFF, *Glacier Exploration in the Eastern Karakoram. Geog. Jour.* 35, 1910, p. 631. See also a note by Dr. Longstaff in *Alp. Jour.* May, 1911 (vol. 29). p. 488, where he gives reasons for identifying Teram Kangri with the peak photographed by Sella.]{.footnote}

[^1505]: [Comm. Paganini has calculated the altitude of this shoulder from four photogrammetric stations (X, XIII, XV and XVI on the triangulation sketch), and obtained an average of 21,588 feet. According to this the height reached by Wessely and Guillarmod would be about 21,400 feet.]{.footnote}

[^1506]: [See the article by PFANNL, already cited, in *Zeit. des deut. u. oest. Alpenver.*]{.footnote}

[^1507]: [*Windy Gap*: refer [Skyang Kangri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skyang_Kangri#Passes)]{.footnote}

[^1508]: [See panorama [G](https://flic.kr/p/2nivUR5).]{.footnote}

[^1509]: [See panorama [H](https://flic.kr/p/2niw7EC).]{.footnote}

[^1510]: [The Duke thinks it possible that by this pass one might attain directly to the glacier which was to be seen flowing at the base of Sella Pass, coming from the northern side of K^2^.]{.footnote}

[^1511]: [In Chapter XIX I have tried to correlate the observations of the Duke on the region east of the Baltoro with those of the only other explorer of these parts, Col. Sir Francis Younghusband.]{.footnote}
