# CHAPTER XVI.<br />FROM THE BASE OF K^2^ TO THE FOOT OF BRIDE PEAK.<br />THE UPPER BALTORO GLACIER.  {#seventeen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
K^2^ as surveyed by the Expedition. — Lanfafahad, Chiring or Chogo? — Weather
during June. — Early Monsoon of the Karakoram. — Bride Peak, the new Goal of the
Duke. — Return to Base Camp. — Changes in the Glaciers and Mountains. — The Camp
moved to Concordia. — Sella’s Work. — The Duke sets out for Bride Peak. —
Moraines of the Southern Branch of the Baltoro. — Camp at the Foot of Golden
Throne.— Landslides and Avalanches. — Hidden Peak and the Eastern Slopes of
Bride Peak. — Mustagh Tower. — Weather during July. — Melting of the Glaciers. —
The Snow Limit. — Sunsets. <br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_272.jpg ""){#b272}
::::

OUR work in the neighbourhood of K^2^ and the glacier basin of the Godwin Austen
was at an end. The Duke had explored the mountain in detail, its glaciers and
surrounding ranges on the south, west and east; he had seen and photographed the
outline of its northern wall, perhaps the most precipitous of all. Despite
unfavourable atmospheric conditions, despite the mists and fogs that
persistently covered the peaks and walls, Sella and Negrotto, by taking
advantage of every brief interval of fair weather, had succeeded in getting
views of the valleys and mountains about the monarch, and in completing a
network of photogrammetric panoramas and of angles read on the tacheometer.

K^2^ now stood revealed in detail, and it became possible to make accurate
drawings of its outlines, its ridges and the inclination of its walls. The
mountain is a quadrangular pyramid, the corners being formed by four main crests
meeting at right angles—the south-west and north-east, the north-west and
south-cast. The first two are prolonged in long and powerful buttresses,
proportionate in size to the mass which they sustain. The other two are cut off
short and precipitously—one at Savoia Pass, the other at the shoulder of the
mountain, where it divides into a southern and an eastern branch. These four
ridges outline irregular walls, which are orientated to the four cardinal points
and are cut by secondary ridges. The western and northern faces are rocky. The
southern is likewise rocky, but the De Filippi glacier runs across it obliquely.
The eastern face is all armed with ice, and has a great shoulder two-thirds of
the way up, upon which the terminal peak rears itself, a cone over 3,000 feet
high.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![K^2^ FROM THE SOUTH.](Karakoram_278.jpg "K^2^ FROM THE SOUTH."){#b278}
::::

It is quite certain that K^2^, from whatever point one looks at it, has one peak
and one only. It is not clear how some observers can have managed to see two. In
Drew’s book^[^1600]^ is a drawing of K^2^ seen from the south-west from more
than 62 miles away, showing it with two distinct points divided by a broad
saddle. Sir Martin Conway also believed he had seen a twin peak. On the other
hand, Godwin Austen distinctly affirmed the contrary, and he was right.^[^1601]^ It is
perhaps the great eastern shoulder seen from certain points of view that has
created the false impression. 

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![K^2^ seen from the South, <small>by telephotography.</small>](Karakoram_279.jpg "K^2^ seen from the South, <small>by telephotography.</small>"){#b279}
::::

I know no other mountain which has such diverse aspects when seen from its
different sides. The plates showing it from west, south, cast and north-east^[^1602]^
display its extraordinary variety of form, and show, too, how all its sides are
equally fortified with the most formidable defences against the attack of the
mountain climber. After weeks of examination, after hours of contemplation and
search for the secret of the mountain. the Duke was finally obliged to yield to
the conviction that K^2^ is not to be climbed. Its height is not a factor in the
case. It is the obstacles peculiar to mountain climbing and familiar to the
mountaineer that close the paths of ascent to K^2^. I know how hard it is to-day
to win belief for a statement of the inaccessibility of a mountain without the
most exhaustive evidence. And I hasten to add that such a sentence applies to
K^2^ not altogether in an absolute sense, but very much as a result of the
remote situation of the giant, the impossibility of camping near its base for
more than a few weeks, and finally the unfavourable climatic conditions. If K^2^
were in the Alps it is possible that a siege of several years would end in
conquest, provided that the height did not form per se a physiological obstacle
not to be overcome. Step by step a way would be gained up one of the
ridges—ropes and refuges would be placed. The giant would probably claim its
victims, but in the end would yield perhaps to repeated assaults,

The Baltis gave us a new name for K^2^, as they had done also to our
predecessors. They appeared to agree in calling it Lanfafahad or Lanpapahad.
They were equally unanimous in speaking of it to Conway under the designation
Chiring, while to Guillarmod they called it Chogo. The last is common to various
peaks of the Karakoram. There is only one conclusion to be drawn from all these
names—that K^2^ has had none given it by the natives. The fact is not
surprising.

Rather it would be strange if the natives who live on the slopes of the
Karakoram, who have left unchristened numberless peaks which they see every day,
had had the idea of giving a name to a particular one six days’ journey from
their villages beyond the much-dreaded glaciers, in a region to which they have
been dragged solely by the insatiability of European curiosity. The brothers
Schlagintweit made a vain search for a native name both in Baltistan and
Turkestan, and afterwards proposed the name of Depsang, because they had had so
splendid a view of the mountain from the plateau of that name near the Karakoram
pass. K^2^ is actually indicated by this name in various atlases, chiefly German
ones. It has not, however, so far as I know, any official sanction. It is
strange that others among the many visitors to the Karakoram pass, either before
or after the Schlagintweits, do not mention having seen K^2^ from there or the
vicinity, not even those who have given us a minute description of the view.

During the whole month we had spent on the Godwin Austen the weather had been
exceedingly unfavourable. Only once did we have three consecutive days of good
weather. The wind blew almost constantly from the west and south-west, and grew
stronger and colder the higher up we went. We had frequent though not very heavy
snowstorms. It was seldom that the air remained clear or the peaks uncovered for
a whole day at a time. With the exception of one single occasion, and then only
for a few hours, we never found ourselves on a level with or above the mists and
clouds. They were always very high, like the wind, from 23,000 feet up. The
usual classification of the clouds into nimbus, cumulus, cirrus and stratus,
based on the shapes assumed at various heights, holds good for the Karakoram, by
putting each type some 7,000 feet farther up.

The regular persistence of the wind points to the conclusion that it must be the
monsoon, which would be blowing very high up during this month. We followed for
whole days the rapid course of mists and clouds 1,000 feet above the peak of
K^2^, when in the valleys the air would be calm. This may explain the fact that
in Kashmir and the Punjab plain one is not conscious of the monsoon before July
and August, when it blows much lower, hurling itself against the barrier of the
Himalaya. If, as meteorologists consider, the monsoon is caused by the
super-heated air of the desert of Gobi and the other arid Asiatic regions, when
the sun is north of the equator, it is natural that the consequent reverse
current of air would be apparent earlier in the Karakoram than in the far-off
plains.^[^1603]^

Whatever may be the cause of it, the persistent bad weather imposes a fatal
obstacle upon the mountain climber. The fresh snow, falling at such frequent
intervals, covers the rocks with a permanent crust of ice (verglas). Moreover,
it never has a chance to solidify on the walls or the glaciers, thus there is no
season when one is safe from avalanches nor when the crevasses are covered with
firm snow. Yet after all, the month of June, the worst enemy is indubitably the
wind, which blows up continual tourmentes and makes the cold well nigh
unendurable.

I have said that all the explorers of the various regions of the Karakoram
suffered like ourselves from the inclemence of the weather. But I ought to
mention that in 1908 the Workmans enjoyed two months (July and August) of almost
uninterrupted fair weather, with clear warm days. From this fact explorers may
draw encouragement to plan new expeditions to the Karakoram.

Though our work about K^2^ was finished, the Duke had no intention of making an
end of the campaign. He did not give up the hope of climbing some other peak of
the region which should be higher than any altitude yet attained, thus
satisfying what had been the chief purpose of the expedition. The encouraging
features were the fact that the season was not yet far advanced, the excellent
record the guides had made on the high slopes, and the good health we were all
in, for beyond a certain amount of loss of flesh, accompanied by a slight
diminution of strength and powers of resistance, none of us seemed really the
worse for our life above 16,500 feet. Alessio Brocherel, indeed —the most
experienced guide we had after Giuseppe Petigax—lost so much by his few days’
illness and seemed so weakened, that he could not be depended upon for the rest
of the campaign. The experience of those who had come before us was to the
effect that in the month of July, now close at hand, weather even more
unpropitious than that of June was only to be expected. But this prospect was
not definite enough to put an end to the campaign.

The great difficulty lay in the choice of the mountain. The mere sight of that
immense cordon by which we were surrounded was enough to put the mountain
climber into a mental state of awe and doubt. All the peaks between 26,000 and
27,000 feet were of such formidable aspect, that it seemed impossible to plan an
ascent giving any reasonable hope of a successful issue. The Duke was driven by
sheer necessity to turn his thoughts toward Golden Throne and Bride Peak, the
snowy mountains which rise at the end of the southern arm of the Baltoro. The
first, with its mighty glaciers and slopes of moderate inclination, Sir Martin
Conway had already essayed. But it is only 23,590 feet high, almost 400 feet
lower than Kabru in Kinchinjunga, which had been ascended two years before by
the Norwegians Rubenson and Monrad Aas. There remained Bride Peak, 25,110 feet
high, as yet untried, and possessing the great advantage that it had been
selected as a trigonometric point and measured by the Indian Trigonometrical
Survey. From our camp we had looked with admiration, almost amounting to desire,
at the beautiful outline of this peak. The great northern wall seemed to show an
easy, if tedious route to the summit.

The ascent of Bride Peak was decided upon as early as June 22nd, and the Duke
had discussed with us the mode of carrying it into execution. On the 23rd, while
he set off in violent weather to Windy Gap for his second attempt upon Staircase
Peak, Sella went down to the base camp at the foot of K^2^, taking with him
Alessio Brocherel, and assisting him on the way. On the morrow Negrotto and I
broke up the intermediate camp, leaving a single tent for the use of whoever
came up later to get the luggage from the camp at Windy Gap. We, Botta, Bareux
and fifteen coolies, then joined Sella at the base camp.

We descended the incline below the camp by a much more tortuous route than on
our ascent, because the numerous crevasses were all laid hare by the melting of
the snows. This passed, we stood astonished before the great alteration which
time had worked in the glacier. The melting process had gone on vigorously. Over
the surface were sprinkled little clear blue lakes and a network of rivulets ran
everywhere. Two large and ancient avalanches from K^2^ had spread great expanses
of rugged snow, each of them some half a mile broad and grey with dust and
detritus, obliquely across the glacier, almost to the foot of Broad Peak.
Everywhere else the ice was bare and corroded by fusion. The front of the De
Filippi glacier was much lower, and the séracs along it, unevenly melted by the
sun, had taken on fantastic shapes. Below it the centre of the Godwin Austen was
filled with a broad moraine between the band of green séracs at the foot of the
rocks of Broad Peak and the wide front of the Savoia glacier. The surface of
this latter was all grey with dust.

The hollow where the base camp had been was shallower than before, owing to the
flattening of the surface of the glacier. The walls of the chains could now be
seen from it almost to them bases. The mountains, divested of their thick
coating of snow, seemed shrunken and lean, and their glaciers were confined
within ribs of rock. Live ice gleamed from all the gullies. The Vigne glacier
had been very white; now it wound up its broad valley in stripes of moraine.
Only Bride Peak^[^1302]^ and its satellites had kept their whiteness unsullied. The
former, on its northern wall, is cut with crevasses, betrayed by their deeper
shadow; they must be of enormous size. On the rocks back of the camp some lean
tufts of grass had sprung up.

The day ended in a sunset of indescribable beauty. Now that we had accepted our
defeat, the mountain seemed to throw off its hostility and become serene once
more. We could not see the western sky for the south-western spur of K^2^, at
whose feet we were; but the southern heavens seemed to mirror every ray of the
declining sun. Perhaps Bride Peak acted as a reflector to fling back the western
light. The pale blue sky became softly tinged with rose, then turned a delicate
mauve, to end in a metallic turquoise, like tempered steel. The great snowy wall
showed a pale saffron, then a waxen pallor hike a tea-rose, then a deep pure
white. There was no violent colour. The splendour of the summer skies in the
Alps, which tint the snows with purple, gold and red, was all quite lacking
here. One by one the light left the surrounding heights, forsaking last of all
the three great summits of Broad Peak. Finally, the tranquil moonlight and a
profound stillness and peace reigned over the scene.

The sunrises of this region are even more delicately coloured than its sunsets.
The brilliantly pure light merely increases in intensity, the sky has a clear
gleaming pallor, and there is not a tinge of colour reflected anywhere upon the
snows.

The present fair weather, for the one and only time during our stay on the
Baltoro, was unbroken for three days. We proceeded in this time with the
carrying out of the Duke’s plans. On June 25th Sella left us at the base camp
and went down to the mouth of the Godwin Austen, taking with him Botta and
fifteen loaded coolies. He sent back the latter directly, and on the day
following they made the journey down and back a second time, a march of nearly
nine hours. We rewarded this extra work and their docility in performing it by
some presents of biscuits, a little tea and sugar, chocolate or butter, all of
which we had gradually persuaded them to accept. We were astonished to have some
of them ask for soap and wash themselves, nearly nude for the purpose, in the
icy rivulet between the camp and the moraine,

On the 27th we made the last photogrammetric station on the Godwin Austen, at a
point below the mouth of the Savoia glacier. This done, we sent fourteen coolies
up to the intermediate camp, under the escort of Bareux. Next day they went on
to Windy Gap to bring down the equipment of the high camp. That afternoon the
fine weather showed signs of breaking. Light flakes of mist came and went on the
ridges, grew more permanent, and by sunset the whole sky was dotted with clouds.
Next morning it was snowing. Enrico Brocherel, Giuseppe Petigax and Savoie came
down in the forenoon and the Duke in the afternoon in one stage from Windy Gap.
Finally, towards evening our party was increased by the arrival of twenty-three
coolies from Rdokass, the Duke having sent for them to help carry the camp to
Bride Peak.

The storm continued all the next day, the 29th; but the Duke set off for the
Concordia notwithstanding with the guides and all the coolies. Only Bareux and
Alessio Brocherel stayed with us; the latter had given us some anxiety after his
return to the base camp. His cough and the pain in the chest had come on again,
accompanied by a slight feverishness. Then he began to improve to such an extent
that we thought he might be taken down to Concordia by the next day. We made a
sort of chair with the long alpenstocks and one of the load-carriers, upon which
he might be carried on the level stretches. That evening all the coolies were
once more united at the camp, frisking and playing like children, undepressed by
the lowering weather and heavy, gloomy sky.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![Bride Peak, from Camp III.](Karakoram_284.jpg "Bride Peak, from Camp III."){#b284}
::::

We were up betimes on the 30th, and finished breaking up camp in a heavy
snowfall. The air was still. Four coolies were told off to carry Brocherel’s
chair, and we had all the others start off, ourselves following. After getting
on the moraine we turned back for a last look at the spot which had been our
shelter for the past month and more. It had never looked so forlorn as now. The
heavy snow obliterated in a short time all traces of the camp that had once
stood there. One of our friendly crows was perched on the little level—his
companions had all deserted us some days before.

We went on very slowly, as Brocherel was with us, covering on foot the distance
across the two moraine ridges. When he decided to begin to use the chair we
found, to our disappointment, that the coolies though with the best will in the
world—were unable to carry him. They were not used to working in concert nor
keeping step together, and they were not strong in the arms, so that their
exertion was out of all proportion to the burden, and they had to stop for rest
every few steps. Brocherel, who was finding his strength greater than he had
thought, finally decided that he could make most of the way on foot by
proceeding slowly. So we continued, at the pace of a funeral cortége.

We followed the median moraine of the glacier, which begins at the mouth of the
De Filippi, and is shortly increased by the confluence of the Savoia. During the
past month the level of the glacier had fallen considerably, and the arrangement
of the moraines had increased in evenness and regularity. The long central
spine, formed by the median moraine, now marked by numerous glacial lakes, stood
several feet above the rest of the glacier, which was all corrugated with
longitudinal ridges and furrows, among which ran smaller moraines and noisy
surface torrents of water. Some of the ridges of ice were in the form of long
parallel rows of notched and irregular blocks with cuttings between them. Here
and there the ice terminated on the edge of the moraine in rows of rounded
lumps, which looked like surf suddenly arrested and frozen upon a beach. We
observed several times a phenomenon never felt to anything like the same degree
on other glaciers—the frequent sharp and violent concussion due to fissures
opening in the mass, accompanied by distinctly perceptible quaking of the ice
beneath our feet, which sometimes amounts to an actual undulating movement. The
phenomenon is certainly not caused by earthquake shock.

The moraine grows broader and flatter as we go down, till it looks like a wide
road in the middle of the valley. In its centre the stones are small and broken.
The larger ones are collected at the edges, forming rows of glacier tables. The
walking was so easy that we made Brocherel mount his chair again, and he was
carried for longer distances than at first, thanks to the help of Bareux’s broad
shoulders.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![K^2^ FROM THE GODWIN AUSTEN, NEAR CONCORDIA.](Karakoram_286.jpg "K^2^ FROM THE GODWIN AUSTEN, NEAR CONCORDIA."){#b286}
::::

All the moraines of the Godwin Austen run in straight lines toward the Concordia
basin, until they meet the glacier that comes down from the western flank of
Broad Peak. There they make a wide symmetrical curve to come into line with the
moraines flowing from the upper Baltoro, and they all proceed westward in
parallel rows in the narrow stretch between Mitre Peak and Marble Point, which
stand sentinels to the entrance to the lower valley. We found the tents set up
where the curve of the moraine begins, not far from the Concordia, near the
largest boulder we had seen on the glaciers of the Karakoram. Enrico and Emilio
Brocherel came a half-hour’s distance from camp to meet us, and with their help
we were able to cover the rest of the distance at a good pace and to spare the
invalid further fatigue, so that he reached camp in good condition. The snow had
almost stopped, and a fresh wind was blowing, as usual, from the south-west.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![K^2^ AT SUNSET, SEEN FROM THE LOWER GODWIN AUSTEN.](Karakoram_287.jpg "K^2^ AT SUNSET, SEEN FROM THE LOWER GODWIN AUSTEN."){#b287}
::::

The once more united forces now exchanged their experiences of the past few
days. Sella had profited by the two exceptional fine days to make highly
successful photographic excursions. On the 26th he climbed the rocky corner
between the Baltoro and the Godwin Austen, reaching a shoulder 17,239 feet high
on the black and broken schists from which rises the marble peak. Thence he took
panorama [C](https://flic.kr/p/2niqbj2). The next day he crossed the glacier to
the foot of the great western ridge of the Gasherbrums, and made a difficult way
up the rocks and icy gullies to a ledge 17,917 feet high, just about opposite to
his position of the day before. Here he took panorama
[D](https://flic.kr/p/2niqgtf). These two panoramas are all that could be
desired in the way of showing the whole amphitheatre and its surrounding
mountain chains. Sella also collected and photographed some Alpine plants
growing in sheltered places on the heights up to nearly 18,000 feet.^[^1605]^

The weather steadily improved: the heavy clouds were dispersed, and the day
closed with another scene of unforgettable splendour. It was, in fact, the
extraordinary rapidity and variety of the atmospheric changes in this region
which contributed most largely to the aesthetic pleasure of a sojourn there. The
terminal peak of K^2^ stood out above a wreath of cloud that was faintly rosy in
the twilight. The moon, almost at full, burst through the vapours to the
south-cast and seemed to sweep them before it. The group of gradually descending
summits between Bride Peak and the Vigne glacier were all floating in a bed of
down. Twilight and moonlight combined in strange and beautiful effects of hight
and shade upon the walls and heights. Finally, the calm brilliance of the moon
replaced the daylight, all the surrounding snows taking reflections from the
clear air, while the walls that lay in shadow showed dark and mysterious by
contrast with their radiance.

On July 1st the Duke, Sella, the guides and all the coolies left camp to ascend
the upper Baltoro. Negrotto and I stayed behind with Lorenzo Petigax and Alessio
Brocherel, until the coolies should return. We remained for five days, which we
spent in concluding the topographical work with two last panoramas and in making
two short excursions on the glacier. Brocherel meanwhile went on improving and
gaining in strength.

The high bastion of moraine upon which we were now encamped, near the entrance
to the Concordia, was a fine post of observation. Just opposite us to the west
was the Marble Peak, standing upon its black foundation, which is likewise
veined with white marble. It looked rather like a huge magnolia bud about to
burst. It is confronted on the cast by the large glaciers of the ridge joining
Broad Peak and the Gasherbrums—they unite behind a long and narrow screen of
rock which flanks the Godwin Austen on the left, and flow together into the
Concordia. On the south the vision traverses the wide Concordia basin, a series
of high ridges and deep furrows, bare ice and moraine alternating and reaches up
within the southern Baltoro and the valley of the Vigne, which appear to
converge high up at the base of Bride Peak. K^2^ at this distance has all its
old impressiveness. We were too near Broad Peak to get a good view of it—it
looks from where we are a huge misshapen mass. By descending the moraine for a
short distance one can see the opening and the long vista of the lower Baltoro,
with the beautiful peak of Paiju rising at the end.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![K^2^ from the Concordia Amphitheatre.](Karakoram_288.jpg "K^2^ from the Concordia Amphitheatre."){#b288}
::::

All these giant mountains gain in size and impressiveness as one gets farther
away from them; for the valleys, wide as they seem, are really
disproportionately narrow to the heights above them, so that one sees all the
outlines dwarfed and distorted by foreshortening. Contrasting with the snow are
rocks of bold design in a great variety of colours—black schists, granites,
gneiss in all shades of grey, which when the sun strikes them look brown and
give out red, blue and yellow gleams; while the limestones, white or creamy,
blood-coloured or greenish, run a whole gamut of varying shades. Sometimes we
arrive at a consciousness, even if a dim one, of the wonderful harmony of form,
the perfect balance and proportion of this seeming chaos; but oftener we give up
all analysis of our sensations, and rest in a vague and silent contemplation.

On this side and on that of the median moraine, the glacier has a relatively
smooth strip, and then becomes more and more disturbed and upheaved as one
approaches the marginal moraines. The screen of rocks at the foot of Broad Peak
is not easy to reach. The course of the waters has curved great furrows and
ditches between the moraines and ice ridges. We have to make long détours in
order to go around these, as well as to avoid the steeper slopes. Between the
marginal moraine and the strip of ice nearest it lay a charming little arctic
landscape in miniature, composed of the bluest of small lakes all running in
between the thousand narrow inlets of the undermined and jagged banks. Blocks of
ice reduced by melting to the most fantastic shapes mirrored themselves in these
little lakes. Everywhere one heard the sound of dripping, bubbling and rushing
waters coming down all the surrounding slopes, accompanied by the dull and heavy
undertone from the underground torrents and the splashes made by ice breaking
off and falling into the water. We were only some 600 or 700 feet below the base
camp; but this slight difference gave us a distinct sense of well-being, to
which probably the improvement in the weather contributed. It was quite mild and
calm, and one could stay for hours in the sun on the warm stones of the moraine.
It was most welcome refreshment for eyes fatigued by weeks of reverberation from
the snows. During the midday hours currents of warm air vibrated above the
moraine, as on a desert. None of us ever suffered from too great intensity of
the sun—certainly at Windy Gap it was far preferable to the shade. Later I will
make some comparison between out observations of solar radiation aud those
brought back by other expeditions,

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BRIDE PEAK FROM THE GODWIN AUSTEN, NEAR CONCORDIA.](Karakoram_290.jpg "BRIDE PEAK FROM THE GODWIN AUSTEN, NEAR CONCORDIA."){#b290}
::::

There were not enough tents to shelter all the extra coolies sent up from
Rdokass, so they had improvised a sort of open-air camp for themselves, building
a low circular wall enclosing a flat space a few yards in diameter. This they
paved by ingeniously fitting slabs of stone together. A little beyond they had
constructed a sort of terrace, and at 8 or 10 yards’ distance from this set up a
stone pyramid to mark the west and the direction of Mecca. To this platform they
would go one by one to say their prayers and make their prostrations. It was the
first time we had seen any of them perform any act of devotion: they seem, in
general, rather lukewarm Mohammedans. The Kashmiri, as I have said before, are
Sumnites, and they accuse the Shiite Baltis of practising all sorts of bloody
rites, including human sacrifice; and the Baltis retort the charge upon their
accusers. It is probably the result of sectarian prejudice, without foundation
on either side.

We started up the Baltoro ourselves on July 6th, the coolies carrying our tent,
beds and a few other things. We took to the foot of Bride Peak only so much
equipment as was needful for fifteen days. the rest was left at Concordia in
charge of Alessio Brocherel. He was now quite convalescent, but not sufficiently
strong for the strain of the high mountain work. Later on a party of coolies
carried all the stores left with him back to Rdokass directly from Concordia,
and Brocherel went with them.

The snow had been falling since the day before, and the moraines were covered
with a heavy layer. It showed no sign of abating on the morning of our start,
and the coolies told us they could not walk in the soft snow in their pabboos,
which they were now wearing to save their boots from the moraine. We waited a
few hours hoping a pause would come, and thus did not set out until toward noon.
We followed the moraine for a short distance to the point where it takes a more
pronounced westward curve; then we left it for an irregular tract belonging to
the glaciers flowing into Concordia from the west. There were alternate slopes
of moraine and bare ice, separated by furrows and ditches sometimes as much as
100 feet deep, where there were little azure lakes, or else rushing streams that
wound a tortuous course between their steep banks of ice, the latter all ragged
and undermined and sharp at the edge. We had to keep going back and forth, and
climbing up and down steep slopes, so that it was impossible to take account of
the ridges and moraines which had looked from a distance so very regular in
their arrangement. We crossed the western glacier of the Gasherbrums without
seeing any of the high imposing wall of the mountain itself, wrapped in thick
mist, and reached a furious torrent running deep between steep ice walls. Along
this we had to go for some distance before we found a place where a jutting
piece of ice permitted us to cross over. Beyond were the moraines of the upper
Baltoro itself, which we crossed at the point where they curve westward parallel
to those of the Godwin Austen. The first was the large righthand moraine, a
beautiful composition of limestones, coloured marbles and conglomerates in the
greatest variety, forming a gaily coloured mosaice by means of a sort of reddish
silicacious substance which acted as cement. Next came a file of séracs running
lengthwise between the right-hand moraine and the various stripes of the median
one; these were composed first of a streak of thin black 
slaty schists, then more coloured limestones mixed with schists and quartzes.^[^1606]^

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SURFACE TORRENT OF THE UPPER BALTORY. GOLDEN THRONE AND CHOGOLISA SADDLE IN THE BACKGROUND.](Karakoram_292.jpg "SURFACE TORRENT OF THE UPPER BALTORY. GOLDEN THRONE AND CHOGOLISA SADDLE IN THE BACKGROUND."){#b292}
::::

I have already explained how we were able from the appearance of the moraines to
analyze the structure of the chains whence they came. Now our conclusions were
strengthened by the appearance of the rocks themselves, which showed a clear
contrast between the light-coloured sedimentary and calcareous formations, and
the black and grey schists and granites. This alternation of material in the
upper Baltoro is clearly displayed in Sella’s panorama
[M](https://flic.kr/p/2niqWWD), taken from the crest between the Vigne and the
upper Baltoro. The centre shows the black stripe formed by the right-hand
moraine of the Vigne and the left-hand of the Baltoro. It is all composed of
granites and quartzes from the Bride Peak chain. Next, on the right, is a second
band (coming from the right-hand lower corner of the panorama). Its source is
the confluence of the eastern glaciers of Bride Peak. It has the same colour as
the first, and like it is composed of crystalline rocks. Still farther toward
the right comes a pale grey stripe formed of limestones from Golden Throne, a
thin streak of solid black composed of scales of slate from the northern spurs
of Golden Throne; then another pale grey band of limestones from Gasherbrum I or
Hidden Peak; and finally, the right-hand margmal moraine, running at the base of
the right valley wall—this last composed of light grey sedimentary rock from the
Gasherbrum range.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![The Baltoro at the Confluence of the Vigne.](Karakoram_293.jpg "The Baltoro at the Confluence of the Vigne."){#b293}
::::

There was a lightening of the atmosphere in the west, and we could tell that we
had reached the level of the mouth of the Vigne glacier. A little farther on,
where the end of its right-hand spur abuts on the valley, we made our camp,
yielding to the importunities of the coolies, who were tired and discouraged
with the bad weather. A little afterwards we were joined by five coolies from
Rdokass, who brought us post and provisions, and stayed the night with us.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE VIGNE GLACIER AND THE TRIBUTARIES OF THE  LEFT BANK.](Karakoram_293a.jpg "THE VIGNE GLACIER AND THE TRIBUTARIES OF THE  LEFT BANK."){#b293a}
::::

July 7th was cloudy, foggy and snowy, like the preceding day. We went on to the
camp at the foot of Golden Throne, seeing nothing all the way except the stones
we walked on where these were not covered with snow. The glacier was heaved up
in waves right and left of us, as far as the foot of the lateral spurs of the
valley. For this stretch the reader should look at panoramas
[N](https://flic.kr/p/2niE5ds) and [K](https://flic.kr/p/2niyD77). As we neared
the foot of Golden Throne the median moraine spread out hike a fan, and the
central stripes rayed out till they reached the base of the rocks, where a
little series of marginal lakes was formed. A curious fact which we were unable
to explain was that the laminated formations, like slates, which had been at
first lying flat, were here disposed vertically and formed wide stretches made
of these thin and narrow edges, tiresome to walk over. It looked as though the
stones were thus heaved up by pressure due to the meeting of the Baltoro with
the eastern glaciers of Bride Peak.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SCENE AT SUNSET, LOOKING NORTH FROM THE UPPER BALTORO, K^2^ ON THE RIGHT. MUSTAGH TOWER ON THE LEFT.](Karakoram_294.jpg "SCENE AT SUNSET, LOOKING NORTH FROM THE UPPER BALTORO, K^2^ ON THE RIGHT. MUSTAGH TOWER ON THE LEFT."){#b294}
::::

We cut obliquely across the top of the moraine toward the west, and reached its
left-hand margin at no great distance from the angle of rock which bounds on
this side the great terminal fall of the Chogolisa glacier. Here the Duke had
set up Camp XI, base camp for the new campaign, 16,637 feet high. There was a
lttle lake between the camp and the rocks. It was near here that Conway had
camped when he attacked Golden Throne (Footstool Camp).

As we had anticipated, the tents were empty; but about an hour later we were
surprised to see Sella, Savoie, Botta and the coolies coming down the glacier
behind the camp. Sella told us of the Duke’s new plans, of the great difficulty
they had encountered climbing up the séracs toward Chogolisa Saddle, of the
wretched weather, etc. But all this I will recount in its proper place. The Duke
wanted provisions, and we sent the coolies back with them as soon as possible,
in charge of Savoie and Lorenzo Petigax.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE NORTHERN WALL OF GOLDEN THRONE, FROM THE MEDIAN MORAINE OF THE UPPER BALTORO.](Karakoram_295.jpg "THE NORTHERN WALL OF GOLDEN THRONE, FROM THE MEDIAN MORAINE OF THE UPPER BALTORO."){#b295}
::::

Negrotto and I were in this camp for thirteen days, Sella staying with us till
July 11th, when he took advantage of a party of coolies going down to Rdokass to
leave us and make a temporary shelter for himself with a tarpaulin, near the
meeting of the Vigne and the Baltoro, expecting to make this a base for
photographic expeditions. The days were long and lonely. We had not even the
crows to distract us, as they had apparently deserted the high regions early in
July.  Our only diversion was that of going on short excursions about the
neighbourhood with the purpose of making topographical stations with the
tacheometer. But many more days were spent in idle contemplation of the bad
weather, in passive waiting for news from the Duke, who was snowed up somewhere
on the high glaciers of Chogolisa Saddle, surrounded by thick clouds,
confronting with what patience he might the relentless hostility of the sky.
More than once during the long period of inaction we were assailed by feelings
of anxiety for the safety of the exploring party. Only once, on the 13th. did we
have news of them. A party of coolies with three of the guides came down for
supplies and brought us a letter from the Duke, telling us of the first attempts
at an ascent, frustrated by the bad weather, saying that he was still resolved
to continue in his undertaking.

Two days after we had made camp the sun for the first time got the better about
midday of the clouds and fog, and showed us the scene by which we were
surrounded, to which we had come in the dark, as it were, without getting an
idea of the composition of the picture. Panorama [O](https://flic.kr/p/2niE8DR)
gives an excellent idea of it. The camp lay at the foot of a very steep rocky
incline 3,000 or more feet high, terminating the northern spur of Golden Throne.
The rock strata are clearly marked, and show various colours—yellow, white,
grey, violet and green—being the source of the polychrome limestones of the
median moraine of the Baltoro. The cliff is furrowed with gullies large and
small, and high up on it hangs the broken end of a glacier coming down from the
lofty peaks we cannot see. Avalanches fell continually from the wall, fed from
the uninterrupted heavy snows, during the whole time of our stay here. They were
not so stupendous as those from Broad Peak, but much more frequent. The first
ray of sunshine was enough to dislodge the snow, and it fell in cataracts, in
cascades, in streams, in rivulets, swift and gleaming white, down all the
ravines and crannies of the rocks, and rose up in iridescent showers above every
obstacle that impeded its course. The heavy rumble of the falling mass was
punctuated with sharp knocks and cracklings from the rolling stones, or drowned
altogether by the deafening tumult made by a downfall of séracs, or a rock
breaking off with a tremendous crash and raising up clouds of dust in its
course. In the warm part of the day it seemed as though the whole mountain were
actually falling apart, so huge were the masses of ice, rock and snow that
hurled themselves down from it.

In front of us we had a glacier lake similar to the Concordia one, though
smaller. The swelling stream of the Baltoro bends eastward, becoming broader and
broader, and rising at a moderate grade to the foot of Hidden Peak, the highest
of the Gasherbrum group (26,470 feet), which up to now none of us had seen
except Sella and the Duke. The former got a glimpse of it when he crossed the
eastern chain of the upper Godwin Austen, and the latter when he was on the
ridge of Staircase Peak. It was Conway who gave the name Hidden Peak to this
remote and splendid height. It resembles in shape, on a larger scale, Gasherbrum
IV at the head of the Concordia basin. Its western side is covered with glaciers
which unite and flow into the Baltoro. The Baltoro itself finally bends
southward and disappears from sight between Hidden Peak and a snowy pyramid of
Golden Throne.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![HIDDEN PEAK.](Karakoram_297.jpg "HIDDEN PEAK."){#b297}
::::

Facing Hidden Peak on the west is the eastern wall of Bride Peak, quite clothed
in glaciers falling from a height of some 5,000 feet, great foaming white
cataracts like frozen Niagaras. From our station we could only sec the western
peak, which ix the highest, and shaped like a sharp narrow tooth. Two long
crests run from it to northward and eastward, embracing in the sweep of their
wings the most formidable glacial basin which a single mountain could possibly
show. The northern ridge, which is partly rocky, is prolonged in a massive spur,
behind which a glacier emerging from the northern wall of the mountain empties
into the Baltoro with a high and steep cascade. It is this northern wall of the
mountain which we saw from our base camp at K^2^. The eastern crest is mantled
with ice and edged with a wide cornice. From 2,000 to 2,200 feet below the peak
this crest shapes itself into a large shoulder like a great dome of ice, beyond
which it slopes down at a more gentle incline to Chogolisa Saddle. A rib of ice
runs out at right angles from its foot, and comes down toward the Baltoro,
ending in a rocky promontorv. Between this and the buttress of Golden Throne, at
whose base we had set up our camp, a glacier from the snows of Kondus and
Chogolisa tumbles down in a perfect torrent of séracs.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![EASTERN WALL OF BRIDE PEAK.](Karakoram_298.jpg "EASTERN WALL OF BRIDE PEAK."){#b298}
::::

Opposite our camp the Baltoro flows down the valley northward, occupying the
centre of the view. Turning one’s eyes in that direction one beholds the
strangest conceivable apparition of a mountain, so singular in its form that it
is not to be compared to any other known peak. It stands in the background of
the scene, to the right of the black tooth of Mitre Peak, and rears its mighty
tower against the sky, its sides smooth like surfaces formed by cleavage, its
angles clean and sharp like those of an obelisk. This mountain, of course, is
the Mustagh Tower. It is about 24,000 feet high, and stands isolated from other
peaks on a somewhat narrow base marked by sharp ridges. It appears, and perhaps
is, a true monolith, a rocky mass of a single formation, without traces of
breaks or divisional planes—no other, of any comparable size, is known to exist
on the globe. Words would be incapable of giving a just idea of it without the
accompanying picture. Panorama [L](https://flic.kr/p/2niqJYa), taken by
telephotography^[^1607]^, it shows it, as well as the background of the Baltoro glacier
formed by the chain which runs from Mustagh Tower to K^2^, with its great snowy
peaks, among which penetrates the Savoia glacier. Crystal Peak, Marble Point and
all the other heights along the side of the glacier, are mere secondary spurs of
this great chain. which is the actual watershed of the region. The left side of
the upper Baltoro is formed of lesser mountains of brownish red rock, like Bride
Peak. Of this side we get a foreshortened view as far as Mitre Peak, which looks
two-pronged from our point of view, and very like, indeed, to the bishop’s cap,
from which it is named. The right side of the valley is formed by the large
mountain group which occupies the angle between the three Gasherbrums (invisible
from the camp) and Hidden Peak. It has two peaks over 23,000 feet high. The
formation is light-coloured rock, with low outlying spurs of dark brown. It is
this wall which now cuts off K^2^ from our view.


:::: { .wrap-70 .break-after}
![Mustagh Tower.](Karakoram_299.jpg "Mustagh Tower."){#b299}
::::

July 10th was a beautiful day, the only really perfect one during the whole of
our stay here. On the next the fine weather broke again. A slender pennant of
cloud appeared over Mustagh Tower. It presently covered the Tower, and wrapped
it round with one of its ends, broadening and spreading and enveloping the top
of the mountain as in a mesh, which soon thickened into a huge solid cap. Heavy
clouds appeared on the low saddles at the sides of the Tower, and all the ridges
flew thin streamers of translucent cloud that appeared and disappeared again.
Cirrus clouds dappled the sky, growing and accumulating and hanging motionless
over the valley, till at length they mingled to form a dense opaque grey
covering, from which the snow began presently to descend again, quietly and
steadily.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![MITRE PEAK AND MUSTAGH TOWER FROM OUR CAMP AT THE BASE OF GOLDEN THRONE.](Karakoram_299a.jpg "MITRE PEAK AND MUSTAGH TOWER FROM OUR CAMP AT THE BASE OF GOLDEN THRONE."){#b299a}
::::

The weather was quite different from that we had experienced in June. The air
was quieter, the temperature higher; but the precipitation was almost
uninterrupted. However, it did not quite keep pace with the melting process,
which went on at a considerable rate, even in cloudy weather. We heard a
thousand voices from the glacier—continuous dripping, murmur of little streams,
the deadened noise of distant torrents, the rattle of detritus down icy slopes,
the sharp cracks of opening fissures. Now and then these lesser sounds would be
drowned by the roar of an avalanche. In a few days the surface of the glacier
lowered so much that the tents stood on little ledges a foot or more high; and
melting must have gone on also at their level, though to a smaller degree.^[^1608]^
Little waterfalls were flowing all over the rocks behind the camp, disappearing
at the tops of the great cones of snow formed at the bottom of every couloir. By
July 17th the snow turned into an unpleasant drizzle, which the next day became
heavy rain—this was at an altitude of 16,637 feet.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![GROUP OF MOUNTAINS BETWEEN GASHERBRUM AND HIDDEN PEAK.](Karakoram_300.jpg "GROUP OF MOUNTAINS BETWEEN GASHERBRUM AND HIDDEN PEAK."){#b300}
::::

The data given by various travellers as to the snow line in the Karakoram region
are all very uncertain and contradictory. On only one point do they seem to be
in accord—namely, that in the Himalaya and adjacent mountain systems the snow
line is lower on the southern than on the northern slopes, due to the greater
precipitation on the former, which I have already mentioned. But there are no
precise statistics.^[^1609]^ and only a long stay and repeated observations at various
seasons could decide the point. It seems likely that the high degree of
precipitation, due to the summer monsoons, would make it hard to establish an
invariable figure for the height at which the precipitation would just balance
the melting. Probably such a line varies from year to year.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![CAMP XI, AFTER A SNOWFALL.](Karakoram_301.jpg "CAMP XI, AFTER A SNOWFALL."){#b301}
::::

To the heavy vapours of July we owed some of the finest sunsets in our
experience. For the first time we saw the skies set on fire with the glow, the
brilliant contrasts of gold, azure and violet clouds, and the snows illuminated
by the reflected light. The sun would bury itself in the storm-clouds which
never left the western horizon. Mustagh Tower would he immersed in rosy vapours
until the last ray faded, when it emerged a black and austere height guarding
the whole strange region like a sentinel.

It only remains for me to recount the measure of success which attended the
enterprise of the Duke on Bride Peak, and the close of our campaign.

:::: { .wrap-100 .break-before }
![Evening on the Baltoro, from Camp XII.](Karakoram_302.jpg "Evening on the Baltoro, from Camp XII."){#b302}
::::

:::


[^1600]: [F. DREW, *Jummoo and Kashmir.* 2nd ed. London 1877. p. 370.]{.footnote}

[^1601]: [See *Geog. Jour. 3*, 1894, pp. 431 and 527.]{.footnote}

[^1602]: [Compare Plates opposite pp. 232, 248, 238, 288 and frontispiece.]{.footnote}

[^1603]: [SIR A. CUNNINGHAM (*Ladakh and Surrounding Countries.* London 1834) asserts on the authority of A. Gerard and of his brother, J. Cunningham, that in Ladakh and Baltistan the wind blows all the year round from west or south-west, without the alternation of the south-west (summer) monsoon with the north-east (winter) one. The author found that in Ladakh there is a daily alternation, a steady breeze blowing from the north at night, which at dawn shifts to the north-east and during the day veers to south-west or west—probably a wind entirely unconnected with the monsoon and caused by the local daily radiation due to the high solar temperature of the plateaus. We observed nothing similar in the Karakoram, conditions being absent which could give rise to this periodic oscillation.]{.footnote}

[^1605]: [These plants are classified and illustrated in the Botanical Index of Prof. Pirotta and Dr. Cortesi. In the Nanda Devi group in Gahrwal Longstaff found plants only up to 16,500 feet.]{.footnote}

[^1606]: [Specimens of rocks collected on the various moraines arc given in two coloured plates included in the geological appendix of the results of the expedition; they present an idea of the great richness and variety of colouring.]{.footnote}

[^1607]: [Owing to a mistake, the site from which panorama L was taken is marked on the sketch of the triangulation and Sella’s photographic stations as being on the right side of the Baltoro. at the foot of the southern buttress of the Gasherbrums. Instead of this, it was taken from Camp XI, like panorama O. Sella did take a panorama from the point indicated, but it is not reproduced in this book.]{.footnote}

[^1608]: [On their last campaign (1908) the Workmans measured the melting of the snows on the Hispar glacier—or rather on a snow-field of one of its tributaries, the Kanisabar glacier, 16,650 feet high. In ten days of cloudy weather, during which some snow fell, they registered a lowering of 27.5 inches—that is, 2.7 inches per day. In fine weather the rate was 3.7 inches per day.]{.footnote}

[^1609]: [Sir J. D. Hooker, R. Strachey, F. Drew, S. .Burrard and H. H. Hayden, T. G. Longstaff and others, in the works already cited, all state that the snow line gradually rises as one goes from the southern toward the northern chains. Sir J. .D. Hooker and Col. Tanner are of opinion that it is not possible to fix, even approximately, the limit of eternal snows in the Himalaya. In the western Karakoram Drew and Burrard put it at 18,000 feel; Guillarmod at 18,700 to 19,000 feet but we have seen that the estimated heights of the latter are always in excess of the actual figure. According to the Workmans, the line on the Chogo Lungma and the Hispar would be lower than in the Baltoro basin—from 13,100 to 17,000 feet. However, they observed great variation from one summer to another in the same places.]{.footnote}

