# CHAPTER XVII. <br />BRIDE PEAK.  {#eighteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Plan of the Ascent. — The Glacier Fall below Chogolisa Saddle. — Camping
among Séracs. — Difficult Ice and Bad Weather. — Excursions. — Sella returns to
the Base Camp. — The Camp placed above the Cascade of Séracs. — Chogolisa
Saddle. — First Attempt upon the Peak. — Driven back by the Storm at 23,458
feet. — Snowed in at Chogolisa. — Golden Throne. — Topography of the Region
surrounding the Head of the Baltoro. -— The Kondus and Siachen Glaciers. — The
Watershed. — Climate. — Absence of Electric Phenomena.  — Second Attempt. — Camp
at 22,483 feet. — The Eastern Ridge of Bride Peak. — Two Hours at 24,600 feet. —
Retreat. — Analysis of Results. — The Significance of the Exploit. — Ascensions
above 23,000 feet in the History of Mountaineering. — Deductions and
Prognostications. — The Return to the Base Camp. <br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_303.jpg ""){#b303}
::::

ON July 1st the Duke had left the camp at the mouth of the Godwin Austen in the
Concordia basin, and accompanied by Sella and the caravan had covered two stages
the distance to the foot of Golden Throne. There he set up his base camp, and
began operations upon Bride Peak.

He was obliged to alter the plan of campaign originally formed. The great snowy
slope of the northern wall had looked from K^2^ to be the easy and natural way
of ascent to the peak. But a closer examination gave quite a different result,
showing it to be very difficult of approach. It rises above a high glacial
basin, separated from the Baltoro by a long, steep fall of séracs. This looked
as though the coolies would never be able to mount it, and without their help it
was useless to think of a climb of some 9,000 feet. The crest on the right of
the cascade, which forms the lofty eastern edge of the northern wall, gave no
more encouraging promise, for it was very long, its cornices were dangerous, and
it looked full of unreckonable obstacles. The experience of the expedition up to
now had begun to make the party more cautious in their plans as well as in their
hopes. The Duke and his guides then considered the possibilities of the eastern
ridge of the peak, which descends to the wide shoulder I have mentioned, and
thence to Chogolisa Saddle. If it could be managed to put a camp on the saddle,
by climbing up the séracs of the glacier (Conway had succeeded in climbing part
way up them), there might be some hope of a comparatively easy ascent the
remainder of the way.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![BRIDE PEAK, FROM THE MEDIAN MORAINE OF THE UPPER BALTORO.](Karakoram_304.jpg "BRIDE PEAK, FROM THE MEDIAN MORAINE OF THE UPPER BALTORO."){#b304}
::::

Accordingly, on the morning of July, 3rd, which proved to be fine, the extra
coolies were sent back to Rdokass, and the party left the Baltoro glacier with
the remaining ten, who carried the supplies for the high camps, the two Whymper
and Mummery tents, their own equipment and a few days’ provisions. No one of the
party had any suspicion of difficulty in getting on the saddle, and they
reckoned it to be a work of two days at most. But once more hopes which seemed
well and securely founded were doomed to disappointment. What ought to have been
merely a brief preliminary to the actual undertaking proved a long and difficult
task, demanding eight days of hard work for its accomplishment.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![CAMP XII, AND THE CREST AND EASTERN SHOULDER OF BRIDE PEAK.](Karakoram_305.jpg "CaMP XII, AND THE CREST AND EASTERN SHOULDER OF BRIDE PEAK."){#b305}
::::

They began at once to climb up the broken surface of the glacier, which at the
very start was covered with snow and composed of small séracs, so that there was
no great hindrance to rapid progress. But too soon the snow grew deep and soft,
and they walked in it above their knees, with infinite labour at each step. The
glacier was broken up into large blocks, between which were wide and treacherous
openings disguised by the snow. They could never tell whether the latter would
be firm beneath their tread, or whether a bottomless gulf would open where they
set their feet. The coolies proceeded with much effort and fatigue. Very little
distance was covered because of the continual going back and forth to avoid
crevasses. The guides were aiming at the top of the spur which closes the
glacier on the left, but the way grew more and more difficult. About noon the
coolies were worn out, and a stage was made, the tents being set up at less than
1,350 feet above the base camp on a strip of ice cut in every direction by
crevasses and covered with snow, into which one sank up to the waist. The spot
was at about half the distance up the first cascade. Above it the glacier was a
chaos of blocks running in every direction and piled up in confusion. No route
showed itself. Sir Martin Conway had likewise experienced great difficulty in
finding a route, on his attempt in 1892, and had been obliged to camp among the
blocks of ice. The inclination of the valley is not steep enough to account for
such a huge disruption of the ice. The Duke had observed this same fact when he
climbed the centre of the Savoia glacier. Conway found that the brokenness of
the glaciers throughout the Karakoram was out of proportion to the slope of the
valleys, and he attempted to explain the fact with the hypothesis of a vertical
stratification of the rocks of the valley bed, whose angles and sharp
protuberances would thus fracture the ice flowing above it.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![SÉRACS OF THE CHOGOLISA GLACIER.](Karakoram_306.jpg "SÉRACS OF THE CHOGOLISA GLACIER."){#b306}
::::

There was a rib of ice near the camp which gave a marvellous view of all the
upper Baltoro and the Godwin Austen, with the chain of the watershed from
Mustagh Tower to K^2^ for a background (panorama
[P](https://flic.kr/p/2niFfi1)). The westernmost peak of the Gasherbrum group
just shows its head above the eastern spurs of the Baltoro. The ample
glacier-lined curve beneath Bride Peak is one splendid cascade. The eastern
shoulder of the mountain looks like a great icy dome, connected with the ridge
by a rather pronounced depression. It was this depression which the climbers
must reach, by going around back of the shoulder. for on this side it was
Inaccessible.

Under these circumstances, with the difficulties of the way aggravated by the
fatigue of marching in deep snow, the idea of going on all together with the
luggage was given up, and the Duke decided to explore the glacier beforehand
with the guides, and then to send on the caravan, giving the coolies the
advantage of an already beaten path. Accordingly at dawn on the 4th two porters
and eight coolies were sent back to the base for another tent and some
provisions, while the Duke with Sella and the four guides went on up the séracs.
Giuseppe Petigax and Enrico Brocherel went ahead, seeking a route through the
labyrinth. Great transversal crevasses cut across their path. Between these the
blocks were piled up in inextricable confusion and the openings of dark caverns
and icy abysses yawned among them. The ice blocks resembled those on the Newton
glacier in Alaska, in having their edges and corners rounded off and blunted by
the heavy layer of snow, which was crystalline in its composition, and quite dry
and powdery. It was only after the sun had been hot during the day that a little
crust would form in the cold of the night, making the walking easier for a few
hours early the next morning. But by nine o’clock it would no longer support the
foot, and the snow-shoes proved of very little use.

A way was forced across the first barrier of séracs behind the camp. Then the
party had to round a gigantic block. after which they began to climb an icy
prominence which seemed to offer them a route. However, after a little distance
this path also was blocked by a crevasse, and they had to go back and strike
farther to the right. After some very rough going they reached a furrow where
the séracs were arranged in a sort of alley, allowing them to make some progress
and gain a little height. About eleven they reached another barrier of blocks,
apparently without any way of access through them. But the guides knew that the
broad and gentle slopes which they had seen from below could not be very far
away now, and there was no doubt that some means of conquering this last
obstacle could be found. The snow had become unbearable. Satisfied with the
progress thus far made, the Duke decided to turn back.

:::: { .wrap-60 }
![AMONG THE SÉRACS OF THE CHOGOLISA GLACIER.](Karakoram_308.jpg "AMONG THE SÉRACS OF THE CHOGOLISA GLACIER."){#b308}
::::

July 5th was foggy, and there was a little sleet. Sella took supplies for a
light camp, seven coolies and the four guides, and retraced the previous day's
route in order to profit by the path made in the snow. They went well enough to
the point reached the day before. The guides then began to skirt obliquely
upwards toward the left, searching out a tortuous path among the crevasses.
Finally they found a prominence from which a fairly solid bridge led upon a
sérac, and thence to a depression on the upper side of the obstacle. They went
along the edge of this, always toward the left, and beginning to see a clear
path toward the great slopes at the centre of the glacier. The coolies were
utterly worn out. Moreover, the leader of the file had broken through a snow
bridge and fallen up to his shoulders in a crevasse. He himself struggled to get
free, and his companions pulled on the rope; but he was not released until two
of the guides gave their help to liberate him from his awkward position, if not
from his terror. This episode discouraged the others still more. Besides, it had
begun to snow heavily, and Sella made the wise decision to set up the camp at
this point. He sent back two guides and the coolies. A little reconnoitring
confirmed the hope that the most difficult part was overcome. The glacier above
the camp was even more broken than below, but the crevasses were covered for the
most part, and the slope grew gradually less steep.

It continued to snow all night and all the next day, keeping the Duke inactive
in the lower camp, as well as Sella in the upper one. No change came on the 7th,
and the Duke sent three guides and four coolies to liberate Sella from his
blockade. Thus the party was reunited at Camp XII. It was the fifth day, and
they were still practically at the starting-point, some 1,300 feet above the
Baltoro—prisoners, crowded two apiece into the tiny Whymper and Mummery tents on
a narrow table of glacier surrounded by crevasses and buried in snow. This was
only the beginning of a long siege.

It soon became necessary to think of replenishing the food supply. Sella,
concluding that the hope of photographic work was very slight indeed, and
feeling that the Duke ought to profit by all the forces of the expedition, made
up his mind to go down himself to the base camp. He took Botta, Savoie and the
coolies, and they had a most laborious journey through the snow, which had, of
course, obliterated every trace of path. Negrotto and I met them at the camp, as
before narrated. Next morning nine coolies set out on the return journey under
the guidance of Savoie and Lorenzo Petigax. They never murmured or made a single
objection. All day the bad weather held. The an was full of white semi-opaque
mist, sky and snow were indistinguishable, and they could not see 100 yards
ahead. It was the third day of crouching in the tents, hearing the light
monotonous tapping of the snowflakes on the walls. It fell ceaselessly,
relentlessly. Their only occupation was that of occasionally shaking the canvas
to prevent their being buried.

Late in the evening there were signs of abatement. They even had a glimpse of
sky over the valley through a rent here and there in the clouds. The peaks were
all hidden, and dense clouds hung motionless over the Concordia. The weather was
very long in clearing, the morning of the 9th being still disturbed. But
gradually the mountains stripped off their mist, and came out one after another
in purest and most dazzling white. Where the sun shone through the musts these
were of a silvery brilliance, and the whiteness of the landscape enhanced the
deep blue of the sky. Little spirals of snow-dust curled along the crests,
lifted by the wind. Bride Peak was still shrouded in semi-transparent cloud, and
the mountains about the Concordia remained in shadow.

Up above the Duke had left his camp accompanied by all his caravan, and, finding
a route shorter than that taken by Sella, gained the spot where the latter had
camped on the 5th. Thence he continued to ascend, making a wide circuit toward
the centre of the glacier. until he was sure there were no more obstacles to be
encountered, save that of the deep snow. Then he placed his camp 19,098 feet
above sea level and some 1,650 feet below Chogolisa Saddle. The weather
continued to improve all the afternoon, but not until four o'clock did the
Mustagh Tower emerge from the mists clinging about it. K^2^ and Gasherbrum rose
high above the mountains in the foreground, showing the height to which the
party had now attained.

On July 10th, eight days after leaving the base camp, the Duke succeeded in
setting up camp on Chogolisa Saddle at 20,784 feet of altitude, after a march of
five hours up easy snow-slopes, on a morning perfectly bright and cold. The
tents were erected on the northerly stope of the saddle, just below its highest
point, in a hollow filled with snow, which made a good shelter from the bitter
wind that swept down from the brow of the saddle. The coolies were benumbed with
cold, and were sent back to the lower camp. They had performed the work of real
Alpine porters, coming up over the séracs with full loads of luggage, and had
lived in camps on the snows without fires and contrary to all the habits of
their normal lives, all of which proved how much they had been able to adapt
themselves, and showed the influence we had gained over them.

Chogolisa Saddle is between the eastern crest of Bride Peak and a rounded icy
dome 21,653 feet high. on the other side of which is Kondus Saddle, at the foot
of Golden Throne. This saddle is a little lower than Chogolisa. The day was
perfect, and the view which the Duke had from his station a very grand one. The
three summits of Broad Peak were visible, likewise all four of the Gasherbrums,
now seen together for the first time, rising between the spurs on the east of
the Baltoro and the southern buttress of Golden Throne. Northward the horizon
was closed by the great ridge stretching from K^2^ to Mustagh Tower. The
glaciers of Bride Peak flung themselves down to the Baltoro just beneath him.
Opposite that mountain the western walls of Golden Throne completed the
panorama, these also covered with glaciers from peaks to base. South of the
saddle continued a series of complex chains, and the Kondus Valley, dominated on
the west by heights easily recognizable as K^8^^[^1700]^, K^9^^[^1701]^,
K^10^^[^1702]^ and K^11^^[^1703]^, between 22,736 and 25,426 feet high, among an
infinite host of unnamed mountains and unexplored valleys. Just as from the
other cols climbed by the expedition, the view was nothing but ice and snow and
rocky wilderness spreading out to the horizon. One felt as if the inhabited
earth had been left behind for ever.

July 11th continued fair, and it was the part of wisdom not to lose an hour of
the auspicious weather. No more than 4,326 feet of vertical distance remained
between Chogolisa and the summit, a height which in the Alps one could be fairly
sure of covering in a day. But failure would certainly have attended an attempt
to finish the climb at a single stage, on account of the enormous quantity of
soft snow. There was a good distance between the camp and the foot of the final
height which had to he covered by walking in snow nearly up to the waist, a
performance the fatigue of which cannot be measured by those who have never
tried it. Thus the climbers would begin the actual ascent with forces already
depleted, and very likely still further weakened by the increasing rarefaction
of the air. On these grounds the Duke decided to set up an intermediate camp
with the two Mummery tents and four sleeping-bags. The party of seven left the
shelter camp early m the morning. They described a broad curve in climbing to
the top of the glacier, reaching the steep southern slope of the icy dome
between Chogolisa and Bride Peak. This they traversed horizontally. The snow
made very bad and uncertain walking, and they would plunge in half-way up the
thigh. This was fearfully fatiguing to all the party, especially the porters. At
half-past eleven they stopped, though they had not yet reached the foot of the
depression between the dome and the crest, and set up the tents on the slope,
levelling oft a little ledge with their feet. The three porters went back to
Chogolisa camp, leaving Giuseppe Petigax, Enrico and Emilio Brocherel with the
Duke. They were now at 21,673 feet of altitude, only 3,437 feet remaining
between them and the top. If the weather held another day, victory was in their
grasp. The day was warm, still and fine, but toward the south-west were some
gradually thickening vapours that boded ill. Threatening clouds rolled up on the
hills, covering peaks and ranges. Then suddenly it seemed that the weather
relented, the disheartening portents withdrew, leaving at sunset only a few
insignificant mist wreaths here and there on the heights. The prospects for the
morrow were very good.

At five o'clock on the 12th the party was on the way. It was a mild and foggy
day, the air warm and relaxing, the snow already bad. The guides took turns at
the head of the rope, in anticipation of the hard work that was to come. They
were an hour and a half in reaching the foot of the depression, and as much more
in climbing up to it at the base of the ridge. Two bergschrunds were safely
crossed by means of heavy snow bridges. The mist grew denser and a little wind
had sprung up, but not cold or strong enough to be annoying. At 23,000 feet they
changed their snow-shoes for crampons, and began to ascend the ridge. They were
obliged to cut the very steep slope on the side of the crest, despite the
evident danger of avalanches from the snow, which was two feet deep and did not
form compactly with the older layer beneath it, because they must avoid the
still greater danger of the cornice curving widely out over the abyss to the
right. For two hours and a half they went on at an even, slow and cautious pace.
Meanwhile the fog grew worse and worse, and was now so dense that the party
stopped on a projecting rock, and taking counsel together decided on the course
which was, under the circumstances, the only wise one to pursue. The danger was
too imminent, and it increased at every step. They must go back. They had
reached 23,458 feet, walking with slow and even pace, not suffering serious
difficulty in breathing, nor palpitation. They made the descent in weather
steadily growing worse, and by the time they reached Chogolisa, taking with them
the intermediate camp, it was snowing.

The fog lifted somewhat towards evening, and they could see the extent over
which the storm raged. Masses of threatening black cloud were constantly rolling
up from the lower Baltoro. The snows reflected their tones of deep violet and
ash colour. The entire party slept heavily, being greatly fatigued, while the
snow fell silently and ceaselessly outside.

The blockade lasted this time for four days. Sometimes there was a show of
relief from this or that quarter of the sky, when a brief and sudden opening
would break between the clouds. Of all such the Duke took advantage to study the
region as best he might, and to repeat a series of observations to the
surrounding mountains which he had made from Camp XIII. I have collected all
these observations in Chapter XIX, in order not to burden the narrative with
technical detail, and in this place will only describe the general disposition
of the valleys and ranges at the head of the Baltoro, in so far as they may be
derived from the necessarily limited and fragmentary observations made by the
Duke from Chogolisa Saddle. The conclusions are merely general, and are not to
be taken in an absolute sense; but they are worth recording, as they deal with a
region as yet totally unknown, and may thus serve as a basis for the operations
of future explorers.

The mass of Golden Throne looks much larger from this point of view than when
seen from the north on the Baltoro glacier. Its five main peaks rise above an
icy crest which runs from north-west to southeast. At the extremities of this
crest are two other minor summits—21,207 feet on the Baltoro, and another, snowy
like the first, south of the chain on the Kondus glacier. According to the
angles read by the Duke, the highest peak of the central group would be the
second from the north, 23.743 feet high (23,600 feet. Conway). A long snowy
ridge descends thence to the glacier below Kondus Saddle. Upon it is Pioneer
Peak, climbed by Conway in 1892, with Major Bruce, the guide Zurbriggen, and two
Gurkas from Nepaul.

Gasherbrum 11 (26,360 feet) seems to be connected with Hidden Peak by a high
crest with a slight depression or col in it, so that the chain is practically
unbroken from Hidden to Broad Peak. The col probably leads to the Gasherbrum
glacier of Younghushand. The large group of mountains at the angle between the
western Gasherbrum and Hidden Peak must form a separate system, detached from
the Gasherbrum. The Duke from his high camps, as well as we at our station at
the foot of Golden Throne, saw several times the western ridge of Hidden Peak
lighted very far down by the sunset rays, and argued from this fact that there
is probably no ridge intervening between Peak 22,139 and the Gasherbrums, but
very likely a valley instead, and that the large glacier descending to the
Cloncordia basin probably gathers up the tributaries from the southern wall of
the Gasherbrums.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![GOLDEN THRONE AND PIONEER PEAK, FROM THE SÉRACS OF THE CHOGOLISA.](Karakoram_314.jpg "GOLDEN THRONE AND PIONEER PEAK, FROM THE SÉRACS OF THE CHOGOLISA."){#b314}
::::

From Hidden Peak to Golden Throne runs a crest with two distinct depressions in
it, about equal in height. This crest closes in the Baltoro basin, separating it
from the head of the Kondus glacier. On the maps of the Indian Survey the Kondus
reaches to the southern base of Chogolisa Saddle; but it really extends further
eastward and northward, skirting the foot of Golden Throne, and ends in a wide
basin confined on the west by the crest already mentioned between Hidden Peak
and Golden Throne, and on the north by a chain parallel to Golden Throne. This
chain probably joins on to the Gasherbrum range, Hidden Peak forming the
connecting link. It contains a marked depression between peaks of considerable
height, and just visible from Chogolisa, to the south-east of Golden Throne. By
this one must have access to the Oprang valley, and from its position one would
judge that it might be the pass seen by Sir Francis Younghusband at the head of
the Urdok glacier.

Longstaff believed that he had identified this pass of Sir Francis Younghusband
with a depression situated at the upper end of the Siachen glacier. But the
latter lies farther beyond, and to the east-south-east. From Chogolisa one could
see a large valley running between two parallel chains of high mountains on the
other side of the Kondus basin; and this, to judge by its direction, must be the
Siachen. It is probably separated from the Kondus by a ridge of no great height.
The upper Siachen has thus no connection with the Baltoro, the head of the
Kondus coming in between the two. The Kondus descends south-west, encircling
Golden Throne, then southward in a deep channel at the foot of Kondus and
Chogolisa Saddles. The southern wall of Chogolisa is very steep—that of the
Kondus was not visible from the Duke’s point of observation.

The watershed extends from Hidden Peak to the south-east. enclosing the Kondus
basin to the north, and continuing in the northern ridge of the Siachen as far
as Teram Kangri. Its course east of this to the Karakoram pass is still
unknown.^[^1704]^

From July 13th to 16th bad weather prevented, as I have already said, any fresh
assault on the peak. The wind was always south-west and snow fell at frequent
intervals. The sky was usually covered with a uniform grey cloud ; but great
cumulus clouds were not lacking, of the sort which with us mean heavy storms
usually accompanied with lightning. But we, as well as all our predecessors, can
testify to the complete absence of electrical manifestations in the Karakoram.
In all these stormy weeks we never once saw a flash of lightning or heard
thunder. On none of his many excursions to the rocky spurs about the Godwin
Austen and the Concordia did Sella see fulgorites, neither did the Duke upon the
rocks of Bride Peak. R. Strachey reports that storms with electrical
accompaniment are very rare on the northern slopes of Kumaon-Gahrwal, but not on
the Tibetan plateau. Thomson considers the infrequency of such phenomena north
of the Himalaya to be due to the absence of cumulus clouds, but this explanation
would not hold for the Baltoro. On the other hand, the atmosphere of the
southern chains is so charged with electricity, even in the absence of storms,
that it has been found necessary to equip the theodolite with a portable
lightning-rod (Purdon). No satisfactory hypothesis has been produced for this
peculiarity of the climate in the Karakoram. It is certain that the absence of
electrical storms deprives the region of a distinct element of grandeur and
fascination. Another peculiarity which I should mention, probably related in
some way to the regularity of the periodic wind, is the stability of the
barometer. It showed only slight variation, and gave no indication of
approaching change in the weather.

||Before Eating, per Minute.| After Eating, per Minute.|
|---|:---:|:---:|
|H.R.H.|60|72 |
|Giuseppe Petigax|70|70 |
|Enrico Brocherel|70|80 |
|Emilio Brocherel|74|84|
Table: List of observations made on the pulse of the party at Chogolisa Saddle, July 14th :

The health of the party still remained good. Their experience was quite
different from that of Dr. Workman, who believes it impossible to sleep at
heights of over 20,000 feet. The Duke and all the guides slept well and
uninterruptedly, not only at Chogolisa Saddle (over 20,600 feet), but also in
the higher camps at 21,673 and 22,483 feet, despite the fact that they were
crowded by twos into the two small Mummery tents. None of them had difficulty in
breathing; there was no headache, and their pulses were normal. The only sign of
the unusual conditions under which they were living was the gradual loss of
appetite, which, however, was not accompanied by any other abnormal symptoms. At
the end of their campaign they were only able to eat lightly twice a day, and
then with considerable distaste for the food. Negrotto and I had the like
experience at the base camp, whence I argue that long sojourns at over 16,000
feet would probably have ultimately injurious results. Naturally, we all grew
thinner, and suffered gradual diminution of energy.

On the 13th the three porters came down to the base camp for supplies. At Camp
XIII among the séracs they picked up the coolies, who had been there alone since
the evening of the 10th. Two of their number, unable to stand the continuous
storms, the cold and loneliness, had roped themselves together the next day and
succeeded in finding a way down among the labyrinth of crevasses. This was the
only case of desertion in the entire campaign. The other seven coolies had
stayed faithfully at their post. We only sent five of them back from the base
camp, and they and the porters reached Chogolisa on the 16th.

The snow had ceased. The peaks were still heavily shrouded. but it seemed
reasonable to hope that this improvement indicated a break in the long spell of
bad weather. Experience had taught that the respite would be brief, and was to
be profited by to the uttermost. With the purpose of expediting the march, the
stores for the shelter camp were all carried up on the day before to the spot
where the party had spent the night of the 11th. The evening was not promising.
The top of Bride Peak freed itself, but above it were high stratus and cumulus
clouds, and the sun set in the midst of long bands of cirrus. However, the die
was cast. Next morning, despite uncertain weather, the Duke set out at half-past
six with the guides and porters. They reached the point where the supplies had
been deposited, took them up and went on, climbing the slope to the very foot of
the saddle. It goes without saying that the snow was as bad as ever. The porters
were sent back to Chogolisa, and the tents put up, 22,483 feet above sea level
and only 2,627 feet below the summit of the peak. This figure is derived from
the pressure readings with the Fortin barometer. No one before now had ever
camped at such a height, except possibly Longstaff. In 1905 he passed a night in
the open on the snowy crest of Gurla Mandhata, at a height tentatively estimated
by him to be about 23,000 feet.

The snow began again; but the guides kept on, with the intention of breaking a
path to facilitate the next day’s ascent. It did seem as though fate intended to
be kind at last, for all was clear at sunset, and a magnificent starry sky gave
promise of a clear morrow.

At half-past five on the morning of July 18th the little party left their
shelter. They all realized that the crisis was at hand, that the day would
either see thew efforts crowned with success or witness their final
discomfiture. The air was lifeless, the sun weak and pale and surrounded by a
watery aureole of clouds, a sight of most unfavorable augury. As far up as the
shoulder the snow was fairly compact, and allowed good progress. In an hour they
had reached the top of the shoulder, and stood at 23,000 feet. All about them
the mist had closed in, a danger graver than any other for the mountain climber,
concealing surrounding perils, and making it impossible to contend with
obstacles by rendering them invisible.

They had reconnoitred on the 12th the first part of the route. Beyond this they
guided themselves by them recollection of the ridge as it appeared from below.
Thus they reached some rocks rising from the snow about two-thirds of the
distance from the summit. They knew they had to keep in midway between the
cornice and a great open crevice a little way below. The snow was very trying,
being over two feet deep, and the grade was steep. The foot went down so far at
every step that one felt there was no solid ground beneath. At every ominous
creaking of the snow they were obliged to bear away obliquely toward the
cornice, until the appearance of fissures and the breath of a cold wind from
below warned them that they were hanging over the abyss. Again they would cut
the slope farther down, until at no great distance from them an extent of snow
would detach itself with a crack and slide rustling down toward the gap. The
pickaxes sunk to the handle without meeting any resistance, so there was no hope
of their being able to stop the snow from sliding. Nothing could be seen beyond
a few yards, but they realized that bottomless gulfs opened on every side.

Thus they climbed for four and a half hours, slowly and evenly, making brief
halts every fifteen minutes. They breathed quickly but not laboriously, and
their fatigue was not very great, despite the steep grade, the heaviness of the
snow and the lifeless ar. By 11 o’clock they had gained the prominence of rock
noted from below—24,278 feet up—and after a short rest they essayed to climb it.
It was firm and solid rock coated here and there with verglas, but directly they
had to climb with hands as well as feet great difficulty in breathing became
apparent, and their progress was very slow. The rocks were conquered in two
hours, and the Duke believed himself to be at last upon the terminal crest.
Instead of this another tract of steep snow-covered slope stretched away vaguely
into the mist above them. They knew the cornice was on their right, and on the
left the mountain side fell precipitously, rugged with séracs just dimly seen.
It would have been madness to go on blindly, over a slope of unknown
inclination, even the general direction of which had not been made out from
below, edged with a wide cornice and covered with deep and treacherous snow. The
calm mild weather permitted them to stop awhile, in the faint hope that some
fugitive wind would brush away the mists. The Fortin barometer registered 12
9/32 in., the temperature stood at 21° F., and the tension of aqueous vapour was
5/32 in. These observations, corrected by reference to those of the stations of
Srinagar, Leh, Skardu and Gilgit, gave a height of 24,600 feet.^[^1705]^

They waited for two hours. At half-past three the weather was unchanged, and the
Duke was forced to give the order for retreat. There was a long and dangerous
descent to be made before nightfall. Neither he nor any of his three companions
noticed any ill effects from the rarefaction of the air. All their pulses were
regular, only a little over 100. They had climbed to within 510 feet of the
summit, and there is no manner of doubt that, given a clear atmosphere, even
with the bad condition of the snow, they would have completed the ascent in a
couple of hours and reached 25,110 feet.

Slowly and cautiously as they had come up, they returned, retracing their track
in the treacherous snow. From the shoulder down they were able to proceed
somewhat more rapidly. The porters and coolies were waiting for them at the
tents. It was once more snowing hard, but the Duke was anxious to break camp and
get down to Chogolisa, and the strength of all proved fully equal to the task.
They reached Chogolisa Saddle at eight o’clock after a day of fourteen and a
half hours. Of these, at least eleven had been spent in strenuous exertion
between 22,483 and 24,600 feet.

The readings taken by the Duke on an aneroid barometer from tine to time during
the march allow us to estimate the vertical distance gamed per hour. In seven
and a quarter hours of marching they had made 2,117 feet of height, or 292 feet
an hour. If we subtract from this the ascent of the rocks, which of itself took
two hours, the result for the entire distance over the snows is 341 feet per
hour. In the first hour 517 feet were gained. From then on the apportionment was
as follows: between 23,000 and 23,458 feet, 396 feet per hour; between 23,458
and 24,278 feet, 273 feet; and in the last stretch, on the steep rocks, 160
feet. This last figure confirms the opinion of many mountain climbers that,
unless there are snow slopes to march upon, the highest summits of the earth
will never be conquered, as the climbing of rocks is too exhausting at the low
atmospheric pressure of great altitudes. The average rate of the Duke is far
below that made by Graham during his contested ascent of Kabru in 1883. He
claimed to have covered a vertical distance of 5,400 feet, between 18,500 and
23,900 feet, with an average per hour of 650 feet. Longstaff ascended Trisul in
1906, leaving his camp at 17,450 feet and reaching the summit (23,406 feet) in
ten hours, with an average approximately the same as that of Graham, 595 feet
per hour. These, however, were both ascents made under favourable conditions of
weather, snow, etc., and every mountaineer knows the vast difference between
this and marching in deep soft snow. Thus it will not cause any surprise that in
the ascent of Bride Peak the time taken to gain a like vertical distance was
nearly double. It seems probable that in clear weather, and with the snow in
good condition, the top of the peak could be reached from Chogolisa in about ten
hours.

The circumstances under which the enterprise of the Duke was carried out give it
an experimental value much more convincing than that possessed by any of the
other known records. The latter have often been real over-strains, outside of
the physiological field, and their success has been due to the presence of
especially favorable conditions. First of all, the Duke and his guides have
given the best evidence we have thus far of the resistance of human beings
during long stays at the highest altitudes, and of the possibility of severe and
continued exertion at such heights. He and his guides lived for thirty-seven
days at or above 16,000 feet, and then for another seventeen were never below
18,000 feet, of which nine were spent at and above 21,000 feet—all this under
the disadvantage of cramped accommodation, almost constant bad weather, and with
nourishment reduced from want of appetite. During this period they made two
ascents, which meant four days of the most fatiguing work, sleeping at 21,673
and 22,483 feet, and reaching 23.458 and 24,600 feet of altitude.

The height attained by the Duke exceeds by 700 feet the greatest altitude up to
then achieved by men upon the mountains. In 1883 Graham made a series of notable
ascents in the Himalaya of Gahrwal, after which he went to Sikkim with the
guides Emil Boss and Ulrich Kaufmann, and stated that he had climbed the Kabru
up to the saddle a little below the summit, 23,900 feet high. Twenty-eight years
before, the brothers Schlagintweit had reached about 22,250 feet in an ascent of
Kamet in the Nanda Devi group in Gahrwal. During the interval no other approach
to this height was made,^[^1706]^ except by M. Wiener, who climbed Mount Illimani, in
the Bolivian Andes, 21,224 feet high. Most mountaineers believed at that time
that such ascents must invariably be attended by serious physical consequences.
The ease which Graham asserted had marked his ascent of Kabru^[^1707]^ was considered to
throw doubt on the actuality of the performance, and the incomplete and cursory
account of the enterprise gave ground for much dispute among mountain
climbers—dispute which only ceased when, in 1907, Rubenson and Monrad Aas
climbed the Kabru, or at least the saddle between the two peaks. Their account
scems at first blush to show more improbability than the succinet narrative of
Graham. The undertaking was not the result of a deliberately concerted plan, but
was rather of an almost casual nature. The two explorers were obliged to live
for two weeks on reduced rations, and they made their ascent alone, up dangerous
ice slopes, wearing shoes from which the nails had been removed to prevent their
feet from freezing. They descended for the most part at night by moonlight,
etc., etc. Yet no one cast a doubt upon their veracity. Nor do I wish for a
moment to call it in question, convinced as I am that their account must inspire
the most complete belief. But its acceptance by mountain climbers in general is
the best evidence of the great change which has taken place in current opinion
upon the possibility of ascending to great heights without marked physical
disturbance. Beyond a doubt this change of ground is due to the conquest of high
peaks which has been slowly going forward all the while.

In order to avoid a lengthened list I will confine myself here to ascents of
23,000 feet and over. In 1897 S. M. Vines, a member of the E. A. FitzGerald
expedition, with the guide A. Burgener, climbed Mount Aconcagua, 23.100 feet
high. In 1903 Dr. Workman reached a height of 23.394 feet on the ridge of a
mountain at the head of the Chogo Lungma glacier. Longstaff climbed to a
considerable height on the ridge of Gurla Mandhata in 1905—probably beyond
23.000 feet, though instrumental observations of the altitude were lacking. In
1906 Mrs. Workman climbed a peak of 23,264 feet in the Nun Kun group; and in the
same year Longstaff conquered Trisul, 23,406 feet. Thus in twenty-six years,
from 1883 to 1909, no one exceeded the height supposed to have been reached by
Graham; and this, after the Norwegian achievement, became the official record.

However, the greatest importance of the Duke’s ascent does not, I repeat, lie in
its having surpassed by 700 feet this official record. Its significance lies
rather in its having been made under such unfavourable conditions of snow and
weather. This gives it a value above any of the others in relation to the
problem of the possible ascent of our greatest peaks.

I would call attention, as especially worthy of remark, to the fact that the
Duke was able to take the coolies up to the highest camp, 22,483 feet high, and
that they lived under the most adverse conditions for more than two weeks among
the snow and séracs of the glacier flowing down from Chogolisa Saddle. If the
snow had been firm, the weather fine, and other conditions favourable there
would have been no great difficulty in getting them to transport a camp even as
high up as the eastern shoulder of Bride Peak (over 23,000 feet), an altitude
from which it would be possible to reach to above 26,000 feet in one day.

Then as regards the physiological possibility of still higher ascents, the
Duke’s experience was such as to encourage other explorers. It is unlikely that
any disturbance of the system caused by low atmospheric pressure under ordinary
mountaineering conditions would appear suddenly and without warning, even
without a previous loss of energy to a considerable degree. It is fair to
conclude, from the good physical condition of the Duke and his guides at 24,600
feet and from the absence of any ill result of their long stay at this altitude,
that if the feat had been attempted when the expedition first reached the
Baltoro, with each member at the maximum of his powers and the mountains covered
with old compact snow, it would probably have been crowned with complete
success.

But between Bride Peak and the top of Mount Everest there is nearly 4,000 feet
of difference in height. It would surely be idle to predict the outcome of an
attempt on the latter. Only continued tests will solve the problem. The first
thing to do is to select a peak of more than 26,000 feet, where natives will he
available for portage, where it would be easy to get the camps up to a
considerable altitude, and where, at least for the last few thousand feet, there
could be found a route over snow, without great obstacles and not too steep. The
highest peaks of the Karakoram are not adapted for the experiment, on account of
their intrinsic difficulties. Kinchinjunga and Nanga Parbat are likewise very
problematic; and if on closer examination their rivals of Nepaul present as
great obstacles, there is little hope of our conquering any of the greatest
giants of the earth by ordinary mountaineering methods.^[^1708]^

The campaign was at an end. There had been one single day of fine weather in the
last two weeks, and there was little reason to hope for betterment. Under 16,000
feet the glaciers were being visibly consumed by melting, while on the high
mountains the fresh snow piled higher with every day. Another factor was the
decrease of our physical forces, due to repugnance to food.

On the morning of the 19th the tents and other impedimenta were put together,
and in a heavy snowstorm the Duke abandoned Chogolisa Saddle with guides and
coolies, and descended to the former camping place, among the séracs, covering
two stages. The powerful radiation of the fog and snow had swollen and reddened
the eyes of the Duke and Giuseppe Petigax. On July 20th, in the forenoon,
Negrotto and I welcomed our returned leader to the base camp. He did not wait
for even a day of rest. The camp was dismantled in a heavy rain, and the
expedition took up the return march, carrying all the equipment, for which
purpose thirty-five coolies had come from Rdokass on the evening of the 18th.
The crash of avalanches from Golden Throne followed our retreat, like a last
threat from the mountains, victorious but not yet appeased. The coolies were
jubilant, and despite the rapid march, the rain and the heavy loads, they
chattered incessantly, our faithful fifteen of the high mountains relating to
their fellows from Rdokass the experiences of the past few weeks. But the rest
of us were silent and depressed, under the evil fate that had snatched from the
Duke the prize of so much labour and perseverance, after it had lain almost
within his grasp.
:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1700]: [*K^8^*: Skilma Gangri	7,422 metres (24,350 ft) on the western flank of the Siachen Glacier.]{.footnote}

[^1701]: [*K^9^*: Gamba Gangri 7,000 metres (23,000 ft) (approx) near Trango Towers.]{.footnote}

[^1702]: [*K^10^*: refer [Saltoro Kangri I](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saltoro_Kangri)]{.footnote}

[^1703]: [*K^11^*: refer [Saltoro Kangri II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saltoro_Kangri)]{.footnote}

[^1704]: [See in Novarese's geological appendix the important conclusions concerning the geology of the region and the distribution of the chains and mountain systems, which are based on these observations of the Duke.]{.footnote}

[^1705]: [These barometric calculations could not be referred to the Rdokass base, because the observations were unfortunately broken off on July 15th (see the tables of Prof. Omodei in the Appendix). On the maps of the expedition first published by the Italian Geog. Soc. and the Ital. Alp. Club, the height gained by the Duke is given as 7.493 metres (24,583 feet). This and some other small variations between the present figures and those first published are due to the fact that the readings from the Gilgit Meteorological Station were only later introduced into the calculations, in addition to those of Leh, Skardu and Srinagar.]{.footnote}

[^1706]: [Some noteworthy climbing exploits performed between 1855 and 1883 by members of the Trigonometrical Survey, and until very recently buried among the official records, have been brought to light by Dr. Longstaff. In 1874 J. S. Pococke gained 22,000 feel in Gahrwal, and in the same year W. L. Johnson crossed a mountain crest of Ladakh at a height of 22300 feet, and likewise, in 1865, climbed three peaks of the Kuen Lun chain, north of the Karakoram - E57, E58 and E61, whose respective heights of 21,767, 21,971 and 23,590 feet have been determined by triangulation. I will not dwell upon the doubts cast upon the authenticity of these climbs, merely referring to the article of DR. LONGSTAFF in *Alp. Jour.*  24, 1908 p. 133. See also *Mountain Sickness*, London 1906, by the same author; and A. L. MUMM, *Five Months in the Himalaya*, London 1909, e g]{.footnote}

[^1707]: [*Kabru*: refer [Kabru](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabru)]{.footnote}

[^1708]: [I have included in Chapter XIX the conclusions which are to be drawn from the Duke’s expedition with regard to the physiological aspect of the problem of high mountaineering.]{.footnote}
