# CHAPTER XVIII. <br />THE RETURN TO SRINAGAR.  {#nineteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Summer on the Baltoro Glacier. — Rdokass. — Descent of the Biaho Valley. — Jhula
Bridge over the Punmah. — Askoley. — Braldoh Bridge. — Skoro La. — Gorges of the
Skoro Lumba. — Shigar. — Travelling on Zhaks. —Skardu. — Burgi La. — The Deosai
Table-Land. — Sarsingar and Stakpi La. —The Dards. —The Kishen Ganga Valley. —
 Rajdiangan Pass. — Bandipur. — On the Wular and up the Jhelum. — We enter
 Srinagar. <br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_325.jpg ""){#b325}
::::

ON July 20th we turned our backs upon the mountains. Sleet was falling, turning
now and then to actual rain. The moisture gave brilliance and relief to the
multicoloured stones of the median moraines of the Baltoro. When we had about
reached the level of the right-hand spur of the Vigne valley we made our camp,
for the Duke and the guides had already that day made the descent from the
séracs of the Chogolisa glacier, and, moreover, their eighteen days of hardship
had left distinct marks upon them. Next day we followed the curve of the moraine
into the Concordia, and then to the mouth of the lower Baltoro, not getting a
single fleeting glimpse of K^2^ or Bride Peak, or any other of the splendid host
that two months before had received us with such calm serenity. We soon forsook
the median moraine to follow the strip of ice between it and the left edge, and
then began the fatiguing business of climbing over the great wavelike
inequalities of the surface. A stormy and violent torrent cut its course in a
deep winding furrow between two moraines, but we were able to cross it by means
of a massive ice bridge. In five hours of steady marching we had passed the
mouth of the second left-hand tributary, and made our stage inside an immense
conical depression, the bottom of which was occupied by a dull and turbid little
lake. Opposite us was the wide Younghusband valley, back of which, toward
evening, we had a view of Mustagh Tower, surrounded by heavy clouds. It looked
from here entirely different, but was, as always, an imposing spectacle. The
intemperate weather cut off all view of the rest of the landscape.

Quite unexpectedly the morning of July 22nd dawned clear and calm. The view we
had before us was almost precisely that of panorama
[Q](https://flic.kr/p/2niGATU), which Sella took a few days earlier at a point
somewhat higher up,^[^1800]^ showing the tip of K^2^, just to the right of
Crystal Peak, the massive brow of Broad Peak behind Marble Point and Gasherbrum
IV, next to which the snowy cone of Gasherbrum III is seen in profile. The
panorama likewise gives a very good idea of the tall median moraine of the
Baltoro. The moraines are, however, quite run together here, and the glacier
seems to be uniformly covered with stones. We can hardly believe that the side
spurs of the valley, now bare and black and dotted here and there with bits of
vegetation, with only some vestiges of ice near the tops, are the same ones that
two months before had looked so impressive in their winter mantles of snow. The
tributary glaciers have become deeply imbedded in their valleys, and their
fronts, that once stood up so high and white, are flattened and buried in
moraine. Deep winding channels run down from their sides, filled with ice soiled
by dust and detritus. The two glaciers Mundu and Yermanendu are the only ones to
preserve their size and purity. They hang down like trailing draperies from the
majestic Masherbrum, parted by a jagged rocky crest. We cut across the front of
them in following the left-hand moraine of the Baltoro, which is formed of
blocks and detritus of granites, gneiss and quartzes from all the length of the
chain from Bride Peak to Masherbrum. It was a very wearying march. We passed
valleys and deep pits 200 or 300 feet deep, full of surface water or running
streams. Great blocks were poised on the ridges or ice pillars, looking as if a
breath might dislodge them. On our way down we noticed the increase of rocks and
stones with blunt and rounded angles and edges.

After a last laborious crossing of the slopes, we reached the bottom of a large
furrow between the glacier and the buttress of Rdokass, and here quite suddenly
we found ourselves walking on earth—soft, elastic and covered with high grass
full of flowers. The change almost took our breath away. All our senses welcomed
the wonderful phenomena of life to which we had been so long strangers—the odour
of earth and grass and the delicate manifold scents pervading the air, the
colours of the flowers and butterflies, the chatter and rustle of birds, even
the clucking of hens and the bleating of the feeding goats. It all seemed like a
miracle.

We were welcomed by Mr. Baines, rejoicing over the end of his long and lonely
exile, by Alessio Brocherel, now quite restored to health, the Wazir of Shigar
and the Shikari Abdullah. Our coolies of the high mountains went up one by one
to salute the Wazir and Abdullah, bowing so as to touch the ground with their
hands, then placing the latter on breast and forehead, and finishing by four or
five close embraces, in which their heads came over each other’s shoulders
without touching. We meanwhile were slowly ascending the slope under a fire of
salaams from the coolies lined up in rows on the boulders, and reaching the
tents, where all manner of luxuries were waiting for us, chief among them, to
our minds, being a bath of deliciously hot water.

Only Sella was absent, and soon after our arrival we looked for him with the
telescope, and spied him on the snowy crest nearly 4,000 feet above camp,
whither he had climbed with Botta and a coolie to take panorama
[B](https://flic.kr/p/2nivsAp). He only rejoined us by nightfall, after a
difficult and not altogether safe descent. Then we all gathered together around
a brazier, and until late at night talked over the events of the campaign.
Sella, on leaving the base camp at Bride Peak, had spent ten days on the Baltoro
with Botta and a coolie, taking advantage of the caravans that went up and down
to shift his simple outfit, which consisted of a sleeping-bag and a tarpaulin.
He made two excursions from the upper Baltoro to the terminal crest of the
right-hand spur of the Vigne, and had been successful in collecting a number of
photographs, notwithstanding the almost continuous bad weather.

July 23rd was spent in rearranging all the equipment and disposing it for
transport down the valley. We distributed among the coolies all the small
presents we had left—needles, thread, string, coloured handkerchiefs, etc. Our
faithful servants of the high mountains were presented with the outfit they had
used in camp, and went to work at once to cut up and distribute the sail-cloth
of the tents. Pure joy reigned among the coolies, whose number was now increased
by 100 sent up from Askoley. The shepherds departed with their flocks and herds,
now in much better condition than on their arrival. At night the coolies
performed a strange ritual of prayer, consisting of high and rhythmic cries,
accompanied by violent beating of the breast. We thought this might be a service
of thanksgiving for escape from peril.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![DETACHMENT OF COOLIES WHO WERE WITH US IN THE HIGH MOUNTAINS. IN THE CENTRE, A JEMADAR.](Karakoram_328.jpg "DETACHMENT OF COOLIES WHO WERE WITH US IN THE HIGH MOUNTAINS. IN THE CENTRE, A JEMADAR."){#b328}
::::

A very long and tiring march on the 24th brought us down the rest of the Baltoro
to Paiju. It took two hours to get the caravan ready for a start. Beside his
load, each coolie carried a bizarre collection of objects—boxes, milk tins,
mismated snow-shoes, etc., all the useless rubbish of the expedition, which to
them was treasure of the highest worth.

The snows of May had all vanished from about Rdokass, and the bushes of the
little glen near the camp had all been cut to feed the coolies’ fires. We
descended upon the glacier, and followed its left-hand moraine to the end, only
leaving it once to traverse a short stretch of the slope near Rhobutse.
Throughout all its length the side of the glacier fell steeply, forming a gorge
where a brawling torrent flowed. The sky was overcast and the air somewhat
heavy. The moraine surface was fearfully convulsed, immensely more difficult to
walk on than it had been when we came up. Now and then torrents of considerable
force twist and wind across our path, the lower banks of which, as Conway had
noted, were all undermined by water and had overhanging edges. Eight hours of
marching brought us to a point where we could see, from an elevation on the
glacier, the valley of the Biaho, still far away. The last part of the march was
the most trying, the waves all running transversely so as to necessitate
continual climbing up and down over loose stones. Just above the snout of the
glacier we crossed over to the right side, and had quickly climbed down the
steep front at the same point where sixty-seven days before we had ascended it.
It looked precisely the same, and showed no signs of having moved since May.
Another hour, making ten in all, brought us to the oasis of Paiju. The coolies
had held out splendidly. It was raining, and we speedily betook ourselves to our
sleeping-bags, falling asleep to the murmur of the stream, a sound different
indeed from the crashing of avalanches which had disturbed our slumbers in the
high mountains.

We were unable to go down the wide sandy bed of the valley as we had come up, on
account of the increased size of the river. It dashed stormily against the rocks
of the right valley wall, carrying down loads of sand and frequent small blocks
of ice, and we were obliged to cross over high on the slope, an inconvenient and
tiresome route. Some of the alluvial terraces looked as though they might offer
a level path, but when we reached them we found them cut with deep trenches and
gullies, full of streams and showing evident traces of former mud streams. We
only encountered one large torrent on our way, and happily it was divided into
many branches, none of them too big to ford. The valley was remarkably barren,
without a single stretch of verdure as large as that at Rdokass. We saw a few
thorny bushes of astragalus, some artimesia, myricaria and ephedra, and a small
potentilla. We camped near the mouth of the Punmah valley. where we had stopped
on our upward march. At evening it rained again.

The Punmah, which in May we had forded without difficulty, had now become a
boisterous stream, obliging us to climb up its valley for over two miles to a
place where there was a jhula bridge across a narrow gorge. An easy path led to
it, but was broken by a large stream which, at this season, could only be forded
in the morning hours, when it was at its lowest, Here we found a number of
coolies on the slope, with the little herd of goats. The bridge was in fair
condition, though rather long and swaying. After crossing it, we stopped for
nearly an hour to enjoy the sight of the passage of the caravan. Jemadars and
chuprassis shouted deafening orders, and the men got from one bank to the other,
moving with great caution but not awkwardly. After the loads were over, the
little flock had to be transported, each goat riding on the shoulders of a
coolie, carried in a sort of sling. It looked odd enough to see the goat’s head
with its curling horns rising like a helmet over the head of the coolie. Most of
the animals let themselves be carried quite docilely, but a few bleated and
wriggled with fear.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BRIDGE OVER THE PUNMAH.](Karakoram_330.jpg "BRIDGE OVER THE PUNMAH."){#b330}
::::

The usual summer route runs from the bridge to a pass in the Laskam spur, which
forms the right side of the valley, 12,730 feet high, and descends thence
directly to Korophon. But our Balti guides took us along the slope of the spur
to its end, where it falls vertically to the river. Here we had a most diverting
climb up and down steep cheminées, at some points of which stone slabs had been
set in like steps, or crossing steep smooth rocks. The coolies took these much
better than we did, thanks to their pabboos. We rounded the end of the spur
about 700 feet above the river, and descended on the other side over broken
schists scattered with garnets down to the flat valley bottom, where the great
boulder stands that marks the stage of Korophon. It was now noon, and we made
our camp, though hardly more than a mile and a half beyond the opening of the
Punmah valley, on the other side of which we had stopped the day before. In the
afternoon we had a severe rainstorm, which confined us to our tents for several
hours, the coolies meanwhile huddling in the lee of the great boulder. The full
tide marking the daily period of maximum melting on the glaciers reached us
between seven and eight o'clock, unexpected and severe, like a heavy flood. The
river was at least twice its former volume, though we had not had a ray of sun
for two days. Next day we were soon at the Biafo glacier, which gave us a couple
of hours of marching very like that on the Baltoro. We found the Braldoh valley
covered with bushes. The snow had quite disappeared from the sides, and every
little nook on the high slopes was rich in pasturage for the ibexes. We went
along the alluvial terrace, which was strewn with blocks from the rocky walls
above. Al the dignitaries of Askoley had come out a half-hour’s journey from the
village to greet the Duke, and the long way was lined with bowing and saluting
natives. At a little before eleven we were once more ensconced in our old
camping ground among the willows.


:::: { .wrap-100 .break-before }
![Bridge over the Punmah.](Karakoram_331.jpg "Bridge over the Punmah."){#b331}
::::

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BRIDGE OVER THE BRALDOH AT ASKOLEY.](Karakoram_331a.jpg "BRIDGE OVER THE BRALDOH AT ASKOLEY."){#b331a}
::::

At Askoley we left the Braldoh valley, and instead of making the long détour
around the chain of Mango Gusor, we crossed the Skoro La and went straight down
to the Shigar valley. This saved us three days, but at the expense of
considerable fatigue. The Skoro La is 16,716 feet high, 6,700 feet above
Askoley.^[^1801]^ The Duke and the guides were still imperfectly recovered from
their exertions on Bride Peak, perhaps also feeling some effects of the sudden
change from lower to higher atmospheric pressure. But the Duke was unwilling to
alter the itinerary already made, and thus we did not even stop for a day of
rest at Askoley. On the afternoon of our arrival the equipment was made ready,
with addition of the goods we had stored with the Zaildar on our way up, and we
sent ahead a good proportion of the coolies to cross the same day the jhula
bridge over the Braldoh. The loads being ready for distribution, there ensued an
indescribable scene, more than a hundred coolies flinging themselves on the
chests, bags, kiltas, etc., wrenching things away from each other like men
possessed, until with the greatest difficulty we restored order and made the
distribution. The day, like the foregoing ones, was gloomy, rainy and cold—in
fact, during the week since we had left Bride Peak we had seen no reason to
regret our departure.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![LEFT BANK OF THE BRALDOH, AT THE FOOT OF THE SKORO LA.](Karakoram_332.jpg "LEFT BANK OF THE BRALDOH, AT THE FOOT OF THE SKORO LA."){#b332}
::::

At half-past six on the 28th we left Askoley, under a smiling sky and with a
springlike atmosphere. We descended the great alluvial terrace, more than 300
feet above the river, by means of a path winding between fields of gram, beans,
peas, etc. At the edge of the terrace a gully led directly down to the bridge.
It is about 300 feet long and move than 100 feet above the foaming torrent
coursing at the bottom of the narrow gorge between two vertical rock walls. The
bridge was firm and in excellent condition, not a single cross-bar being
lacking. Ten loaded coolies could cross it at a time, and our caravan, decreased
by the number sent on the day before, were very shortly on the other bank. This
also was covered with vegetation. Edelweiss were plentiful on the borders of the
fields and even between the rows of grain, a botanical combination entirely new
to us. We went a short distance along the bottom of the valley, then climbed
obliquely across the slope to the edge of the opening of the Skoro La valley,
1,900 feet above the Braldoh.^[^1803]^ At its mouth is a village of mountain huts, now
deserted, because the herds have all been taken up to the high pastures.
Southward opened the green valley, full of blossom, between two rounded grassy
heights, like the beautiful shell-shaped dales of our own Alps.^[^1804]^ We climbed
along the left side of this valley for some four miles, and set up camp on a
grassy level near the water. We were now at about 13,000 feet of altitude.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![CAMP BETWEEN ASKOLEY AND SKORO LA.](Karakoram_333.jpg "CAMP BETWEEN ASKOLEY AND SKORO LA."){#b333}
::::

Next day we crossed the pass. A glacier comes down from it to within about 300
feet from our camp of the night before. We went first along the slope on the
left, crossing remains of avalanches and detritus of landslides cut by torrents.
Then we crossed the marginal moraine and walked on the ice. A series of moderate
slopes brought us to the snow-covered tributary which leads to the pass, where
we left the main glacier. The latter runs off eastward to a great amphitheatre
surrounded by rocky and snowy summits. Dr. and Mrs, Workman climbed in 1899 the
two peaks nearest the Skoro La, 18,600 and 18,450 feet high. We mounted in
zig-zags over an excellent path. The ice ended some 10 yards below the rocky
col, and at half-past ten we were on the top, in a narrow gap between two teeth
of the rugged crest.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![ON THE WAY TO SKORO LA.](Karakoram_334.jpg "ON THE WAY TO SKORO LA."){#b334}
::::

Mango Gusor, though more than 3,000 feet above us, had lost all its
impressiveness. The day was fine, though the distant chains were still
cloud-covered. Toward the south we looked down a bare gorge as far as the Shigar
valley, beyond which lies the opening of the Indus valley. Still farther on the
horizon was bounded by a misty chain which forms the main supporting buttress of
the Deosai table-land.^[^1811]^ We stopped to rest and enjoy the view, while the coolies
were still climbing the steep snowy slope below us. A few of them were
exhausted, and laid down their loads on the snow; but their stouter brethren
already at the top went back to help them, and the whole caravan was soon over
the pass.^[^1805]^

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![NORTHERN SLOPE OF SKORO LA.](Karakoram_335.jpg "NORTHERN SLOPE OF SKORO LA."){#b335}
::::

A wide rocky couloir runs precipitously southward from the col, covered with
most insecure detritus loose upon the steep rocks. One had to go very carefully
not to send down an avalanche on the heads of those below. The coolies were very
sure-footed, walking cat-like and not disturbing a single stone; otherwise it
would have been impossible to get safely down such a wall with so numerous a
caravan. Some 1,600 feet below the col we began to cut obliquely toward the
right to gain a ridge which is the divisional line between this secondary valley
and the Skoro Lumba. The latter is filled in its upper part by two glaciers,
which break off abruptly high up on the walls. The slope is grassy, and
sprinkled with flowers; but it is very steep and extended, and cut by high steps
which make the descent tedious and fatiguing, Along the way we kept meeting with
Baltis bringing little baskets of delicious apricots, cherries, plums and
cucumbers, the most acceptable gifts we could receive, after our months of
tinned foods. We finally reached the bottom of the deep and narrow valley, after
having descended in this way some 4,100 feet, and made our stage near a group of
shepherds’ huts, on a grassy plain full of great wild rose bushes, now in full
flower and smelling delightful. Many herds were pastured in the neighbourhood,
and we were abundantly supplied with fresh milk and also with eggs. We were
welcomed to Baltistan by a violent sandstorm, followed rather unexpectedly by
heavy rain. The coolies protected themselves as well as they could under the
tarpaulins, the tent-bags and all the coverings they could get together.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![LOOKING NORTH FROM SKORO LA.](Karakoram_336.jpg "LOOKING NORTH FROM SKORO LA."){#b336}
::::

Our nearness to the luxuriant oasis of Shigar, the paradise of Baltistan, put
wings to our coolies’ feet. When we set off at seven o’clock on July 30th they
were nearly all under way. The mountains were covered. The path ran first among
roses, junipers and thorny bushes, then climbed up on a spur at the right side
of the valley. After this we descended once more to the river, and entered a
narrow winding gorge between high vertical walls which bear the marks of both
old and recent landslides. It was here that Colonel Godwin Austen, with his
whole caravan, was nearly overtaken by a *shwa* in 1861, two great bursts of mud
and stones coming down with a frightful crash. The Workmans were witnesses to a
similar phenomenon on this very spot, probably resulting from a temporary
obstruction of the torrent by a landslide from the side of the gorge. At certain
points there is scarcely room for both the torrent and the path, and there would
be no escape for any one overtaken by one of these mud streams. We emerged from
the gorge into a broader space, where the valley met a tributary from the left,
the Nang Brok, coming from Mango Gusor.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SOUTHERN SIDE OF SKORO LA.](Karakoram_337.jpg "SOUTHERN SIDE OF SKORO LA."){#b337}
::::

From here on the valley broadened gradually to its mouth, becoming more and more
green and beautiful. On top of every shoulder is stored up a great quantity of
hay for the winter. About two miles from the end we saw the first ponies,
brought by the Rajah of Shigar, who came to meet us in person with his brother
and a numerous train. It was a pleasure to be once more in the saddle. At every
step we met people who welcomed the Wazir and our coolies with affectionate
demonstrativeness. Joy reigned, and the sense of reunion, of perils overcome and
anxiety relieved was so infectious, that even we fell under its influence. When
we emerged into the great Shigar valley the sun was scorching hot. The left side
of the gateway is formed by a rock full of holes like a beehive, where
innumerable sparrows had their nests and were piercing the air with their shrill
chatter. The valley looked quite different from our memory of it—all the rocky
slopes were bare, and snow and glaciers only came down to within 6,000 or 7,000
feet of us.

We crossed the stony delta and reached the oasis. It seemed to us like the
promised land. The boughs of the apricot trees were weighted with luscious
fruit, and we could fill our hands by merely rising in the saddle. The mulberry
trees were black with their harvest, and the fields were full of ripe crops,
which the natives were garnering. On the roofs of the terraces, on the ground,
on the threshing-floors, everywhere great sheets of apricots were laid out to
dry, and gleamed like cloth of gold in the sunshine. The old Chinese geographers
were right when they called Baltistan “Tibet of the apricots" (Ujfalvy). We
dismounted at the bridge outside of Shigar, and entered the town on foot. In
front of one of the houses, probably the school, some fifty children were drawn
up, and prompted by their master greeted us with three shrill hurrahs. The tents
were erected in the cool shade of the venerable trees beside the polo camp, and
the customary offerings of fruit, flowers and cakes were soon brought to us in
abundance.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE APRICOT CROP AT SKARDU.](Karakoram_339.jpg "THE APRICOT CROP AT SKARDU."){#b339}
::::

The Wazir gave an afternoon tea to the expedition in the garden of his house, a
great tent having been set up and a profusion of Oriental rugs stretched on the
grass. He and the Rajah proffered various gifts to the Duke. It is usual to
accept some of these, and to recognize the hospitality and the assistance
rendered by the authorities of the district by sending them offerings in return
through the official channels.

Between Shigar and Skardu^[^1807]^ we had the experience of a very interesting mode of
conveyance, common to all the western Himalaya—the navigation of the river on
zhaks. We had some of us already used them to cross the Braldoh where it flows
into the Shigar valley, but that was nothing compared to the actual voyage m
them upon a swift and turbulent stream. We sent on the coolies by land with the
guides and the luggage. Then we betook ourselves across the fields to the river
bank, perhaps a mile from the village. Three rafts were readiness for us. They
looked like very fragile structures to contend with the violent stream, which
runs a muddy and swollen course with billows that break and curl over at the
top. Each zhak is made of twenty pig or goat skins filled with air and secured
by ropes to a latticework of poplar or willow branches, with the legs sticking
up between, tied tightly with cord to keep the air in.^[^1806]^ We bestowed ourselves in
pairs upon these primitive floats—the Duke and Mr. Baines, Negrotto and I, Sella
and Botta. Sella tied a box to the wooden framework of the raft, on which he put
the cinematographic camera, in order to take a record of this novel kind of
travel. We sat cross-legged in the centre of the rafts. It was practically
sitting in the water, except for some old pieces of felt (namdah) laid down on
the lattice-work, for our weight made the rafts ride low in the water. At the
corners four steersmen stood erect, with long poles to serve as oars.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![A ZHAK, TURNED OVER ON THE BANK.](Karakoram_340.jpg "A ZHAK, TURNED OVER ON THE BANK."){#b340}
::::

Directly we pushed off we were seized by the current and given over to the mercy
of the waves, veering now toward one bank, now the other, tossed about like
corks, whirled in the eddies, lifted one moment on the back of a wave to a dizzy
inclination and the next plunged into a valley with the nose of the raft under
water for an instant before it rose on the crest of a fresh billow. The waves
repelled by the front of the boat and the breakers which followed us behind
raised up great sheets of water, which slapped and battered at us on every side.
The four rowers used their poles frantically the whole time, but apparently
exerted very little, if any, influence over the course of the zhak. Every now
and then one of them leaned over and untied the string of a skin that had
collapsed a little, blew it up again and resumed his post. Our three barks had
pushed oft at practically the same time, but in half an hour they were widely
separated. Sometimes one of them would escape altogether from the control of the
steersmen and make for some branch of the river, but fortunately these all
intercommunicated, so it would soon get back into the main stream again. The
river banks seemed to fly past us, our course was so rapid. Thus we followed the
wide bend of the river round the promontory of Strongdokmo. Near the mouth the
oarsmen were obliged to get out and help the rafts over the sandbanks, as they
scraped on the bottom with an unpleasant grating, We came out finally into the
Indus, and made for its bank at about a mile below the rock of Skardu. In an
hour and a half we had come down some 12 miles of river, not counting the
idiosyncrasies of our course due to the current, a distance which it had taken
us five hours to march, on the way up.


:::: { .wrap-100 }
![West side of the Shigar Valley.](Karakoram_340a.jpg "West side of the Shigar Valley."){#b340a}
::::

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![From the Skoro La, looking West.](Karakoram_340b.jpg "From the Skoro La, looking West."){#b340b}
::::

The Rajah of Skardu and his retinue received the Duke at the landing-place. Near
by, beneath great poplar trees, a table was laid in European fashion with seats,
plates, cups, etc., and spread with beautiful fruit, cakes and tea in pots. Here
we breakfasted, carrying on a conversation the while, with Mr. Baines as
interpreter. Afterwards we entered the city. The Duke went at once to the
meteorological station to get the readings for July 18th, necessary to make an
approximate calculation of the height reached on Bride Peak; while the rest of
us, restored to the blessing of the telegraph wire, sent off dispatches.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![BOARDING THE ZHAKS.](Karakoram_341.jpg "BOARDING THE ZHAKS."){#b341}
::::

We were lodged in our former quarters, in the bungalow of the still absent civil
engineer. The guides and coolies arrived a few hours after us, and we worked to
prepare everything for the final stages of the Journey. We paid off all the
coolies and said good-bye to our sturdy and faithful servants of the late
campaign. For the last time all the pieces of luggage were counted and sorted,
evening falling while we were still engaged in the task. Administrative
complications lasted late into the night, Mr. Baines wrestling with the greed of
the Skardu merchants who had supplied us with flour, sacks to put it in, pabboos
and other articles, and who, with their Oriental methods of temporizing and
sophistry, prolonged the bargaining interminably. However, we were ready for the
start next day.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![ON THE SHIGAR.](Karakoram_342.jpg "ON THE SHIGAR."){#b342}
::::

As before stated, our return route was to be the summer one across the Deosal
table-land, a decided short cut to Kashmir, in comparison with the Indus valley
route. It is a very high region, with several passes to be surmounted, and thus
is open to caravans for only a little over two months in the year, from July to
the middle of September. A large part of the march lies through absolutely
desert regions. where not a twig of wood is to be found, and fuel and provisions
for several days must accordingly be carried. We were delayed by the local
purveyors of supplies so as not to be able to set out until half-past eight. The
road out of Skardu lies through the squalid bazar, on leaving which we entered
upon the wide stony plain, crossing it diagonally toward the south-west and
fording various branches of the Sutpa river, which flows out of a valley south
of the city. Beyond the river a long avenue of willows leads to the narrow
entrance of the Burgi La valley. When Vigne was here the opening was still
barricaded by a wall erected by Ahmed Shah, perhaps afterwards swept away by a
flood. The valley is steep, bald and stony at first. Farther up it becomes green
with grass and bushes, owing to the humidity of the atmosphere at a certain
height above the Indus. The stage called Pindoba lies about half-way up (11,211
feet high), and 3,708 feet above Skardu, on a sort of terrace rising in the
centre of the gorge. The great spurs of the Indus valley and the Skoro La chain
form a striking landscape of mountains framed by the walls of the valley. At
this point the Wazir of Shigar took leave of us, having followed the expedition
from Tolti onwards. The time of the campaign upon the glaciers he spent at
Rdokass, placing at the service of the Duke the authority and control which he
possessed over the coolies.

Above Pindobal the valley grew wider and less steep. The horses, however, having
been poorly fed, did not take the climb well. There were several mares among
them, followed by their colts, and the poor little things were taxed much beyond
their feeble powers. The valley now grew stony again and full of detritus as far
up as the snows descending from the col. The path crossed the snow for a good
distance, and the ponies plunged in and stumbled along, but went bravely, their
drivers using no force, but encouraging them with the voice. A little after ten
we set foot on Burgi La^[^1809]^, 15,847 feet high. During the latter part of the climb
certain peaks and heights were detaching themselves and standing out from the
chains on the north-eastern horizon, which cave us the hope of a farewell
glimpse of the noble mountains among which we had spent such
never-to-be-forgotten weeks. And our wish was granted. From the top of the pass
we recognized at once the regular one and great snowy shoulder of K^2^, rising
superb above the other heights. The sky was cloudy, and we could just
distinguish through the mists to the right of K^2^ a dim shape, which we knew to
be the rocky pinnacle of Masherbrum. Sella’s panorama
[R](https://flic.kr/p/2niyKQV) shows the extended view to be had from Burgi La.
Sella perceived that a panorama taken by telephotography on a bright morning
from some height near the pass would give an incomparable view of the whole
system of the Karakoram; and, unable to resist the idea, he remained behind for
one night with Botta, keeping one of the Whymper tents and horses with which to
overtake us on the next day.

A short descent leads from Burgi La to a placid green vale, open and rounded in
shape, with two little blue lakes fed by the near snows, one some 650 feet below
the col. Beyond this valley we caught a glimpse of the rolling plains of Deosai.
We came down through the nearly level basin, all tapestried with a profusion of
gaily-coloured blossoms.^[^1808]^ The great extent of luxuriant herbage caused us to
feel surprised that there was no herd to profit by the excellent pasturage.
Where the valley runs into the plain is the stage of Ali Malik ke-mur, marked by
some prominent rocks, out of which the natives have made huts by the addition of
some rough stone walls. The stage is 13,450 feet high. The clouds had been
gathering over the chains, and a little after we reached the spot a furious
rainstorm broke, accompanied by thunder and lightning, a spectacle to which we
had long been strangers.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![THE DEOSAI TABLE LAND.](Karakoram_345.jpg "THE DEOSAI TABLE LAND."){#b345}
::::

The undulating plain of Deosai is irregularly circular in form, somewhat more
than 30 miles in diameter, and from 13,000 to 14,000 feet above sea level. It is
girdled by mountains averaging about 17,500 feet with small glaciers and
snowfields. Shallow valleys run into it, making a sort of shell-shaped expanse.
Oestreich has called attention to the singular contrast between the flat
monotonous plain and the strongly marked features of the surrounding region, all
angles and corners, cut and broken by deep valleys between steep walls and
ragged crests. Drew offered the hypothesis that the plain might have originated
in a filling up of the valleys with alluvial sediment during the glacial period.
Conway seems to think that the process is still going on, largely through the
medium of the mud streams. It may be that such a theory fits the conditions of
the plateaus of Central Asia and Tibet, which are, in fact, composed of
sedimentary matter. But the Deosai plain is a solid formation of granite and
gneiss, as Vigne recognized. K. Oestreich and Elsworth Huntingdon described it
as an upheaval not yet shaped or furrowed by the action of water.^[^1810]^ It is full of
glacier marks and deposits, and must once have been entirely covered by a large
glacier of the continental type.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![OUR CAMP ON THE BORDERS OF THE DEOSAI PLAIN.](Karakoram_346.jpg "OUR CAMP ON THE BORDERS OF THE DEOSAI PLAIN."){#b346}
::::

The route crosses the plain in an absolutely straight line from northeast to
south-west, traversing a number of broad streams. These were clear and shallow
with pebbly beds, running between low banks and uniting in the centre of the
plain to form the Shigar river, the only emissary of the Deosai plain, and a
tributary to the Dras river. It is said to be full of trout. There are many
clear cold springs along its way. The soil is covered with stones and pebbles,
grass growing profusely among them. It seemed to us like a beautiful meadow,
after our months in arid Baltistan. However, we passed some Englishmen coming
from Kashmir, and to them, as to Ujfalvy, it was a perfect desert of stones. The
path is broad and hard; for the route over the Deosai plane, while it is not the
official highway used by the post, is traversed during the summer by a
considerable part of the traffic between Srinagar and Skardu, and all the
Englishmen take it who are bound on hunting expeditions in Baltistan. Marmots
are numerous, and the earth along the roadside is perforated with their burrows.
The little animals are larger than with us, and have pelts of about the same
colour, tawny brown shading to yellow on the belly. On every side we kept
hearing their shrill frightened squeak. The pasture lands of the Deosai are said
to harbour a good many bears. Birds are scarce, likewise insects. We saw no
crickets, bees or wasps, and but few butterflies, despite the rich grass and
many blossoms. The species of the latter were in no way striking. There is a
certain sort of gnat native to these parts, of very
bad fame, said to be most annoying during the warm part of the day. We, however,
were not troubled by it, and found the horseflies much more vexatious. Spiders
were plentiful.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![SARSINGAR LAKE.](Karakoram_347.jpg "SARSINGAR LAKE."){#b347}
::::

Sella overtook us at our second stage, not far from the western limit of the
plateau. As we had feared, he was prevented by mists and bad weather from
completing his photographic campaign in the Karakoram with a panorama which
would have had greater illustrative value than any taken in the chains
themselves. The disappointment was the more lamentable when the next day proved
absolutely clear and brilliant. without a vestige of mist. To the west of us,
back of the mountains bounding the plain, we saw far off the snowy peak of Nanga
Parbat. This was our only glimpse of it.

Leaving the Deosai plain, we ascended the gentle valley which leads up to the
col called Sarsingar, 14,042 feet high. Near it we passed a moraine lake, then
on the summit of the col a second and larger one, which Drew and Workman
consider to be likewise of morenic origin; but Oestreich calls it a watershed
lake. The downward slopes were quite gentle, and had patches of snow coming down
from heights that looked very moderate, but are really 16,000 feet or more.
According to Oestreich the great glacier of Deosai must have come down over this
col, but it probably had more than one outlet.

The head of another large valley, like a wide amphitheatre, called Chota Deosai,
comes in between the real Deosai and the Burzil valley. through which we were to
march. This amphitheatre is the source of the Shingo river, which runs into the
Shigar farther down, thus contributing its volume of water to the Dras. We went
down into the amphitheatre from Sarsingar, and found it clothed with rich
pasture but entirely unoccupied. One crosses over it to gain a narrow defile
which cuts between the mountains to the south, and by which one gains a second
pass, the Stakpr La, 600 feet lower than Sarsingar.

:::: { .wrap-80 }
![PATH TO STAKPI LA.](Karakoram_348.jpg "PATH TO STAKPI LA."){#b348}
::::

The Naib Tehsildar of the district came to meet the Duke with a party of
dignitaries, and they escorted us down from the col and into the Burzil valley.
Now we began to see the forests—the birches highest up, and below them the deep
green masses of the coniferous trees. The path ran among a tangle of flowers, a
hundred kinds all familiar, yet seeming strange on account of their
size—campanulas of every variety, fragrant forget-me-nots three or four feet
high with long branches, marsh-mallows, larkspur, balsam, thistles—all these and
many more growing with splendour and profusion and a riot of colour.

At Burzil we were quartered in a bungalow that seemed like a palace to us. The
high road from Gilgit wound down before us, a splendid smooth and well-trodden
path.

We had said good-bye to the rough paths, the long marches and the healthy
fatigue of our mountain heights. The remainder of the journey was only too easy.
Between flowering hedges we descended the Burzil valley to where it joins the
Kishen Ganga. We noted the gradual giving way of summer to autumnal flora—the
slopes were covered with asters, and the umbelliferous plants, as large as small
trees, were full of seed-vessels. The path follows the right side of the valley.
The left is clothed with evergreen forests, populated with black and brown
bears. Cultivation begins a little before the Kishen Ganga—the same river which
we saw at its meeting with the Jhelum, on our way from Rawal Pindi to Srinagar.
The dwelling-houses here are built of tree trunks mortised together, and look
like Swiss chalets except that they have flat terrace roofs instead of
projecting gable ones. We had become so used to the small cattle of Baltistan
that the herds here impressed us as being of gigantic size. The women in the
fields were unveiled, and looked at us without embarrassment. The men are tall
and well built—they are Dards, an Aryan people which inhabits the country
between Kashmir and the Hindu Kush. They appear to have occupied this region
since remote antiquity (Stein). They are mainly Sunnite Mohammedans, but there
are a few Shiites and Ishmaelites as well.

There was a great deal of traffic on the road, long convoys of pack animals
loaded with merchandise. We also met some detachments of well-equipped native
troops, going to exchange with the garrison of the frontier post. In spring and
winter, however, the route is, perhaps, even more dangerous than Zoji La, and
there are many victims of avalanches.

We followed the Kishen Ganga for a space, and then pursued a tributary valley on
the left, which took us up to our last pass, Rajdiangan or Tragbal, 11,562 feet
high, a little more than Zoji La. On its right side is a trigonometrical station
(11,950 feet), which must command an extended view of the mountains, among them
the group of Nanga Parbat. It was too veiled in clouds for us to see it—not an
unusual experience, apparently, for Sir Francis Younghusband crossed Rajdiangan
six times and never had a view of it. The spreading plain of Kashmir was at our
feet, shrouded in light mists, among which gleamed the waters of its rivers,
lakes and canals. We came down to Bandipur, our route being a progress through
groves of pine and fir, meadows and plains, rice fields and rows of mulberry
trees. The air quivered with heat. and was filled with the hum of cicalas and
crickets, and the voices of many birds. On the shores of the Wular were waiting
the Government houseboats sent to meet the expedition, the members of which from
now on were the guests of the Maharajah, Sir Pratab Singh. We were once more in
the heart of Kashmir—noisy, garrulous, bombastic, servile, yet withal charming
Kashmir.

:::: { .wrap-70 }
![ON THE JHELUM. THE RETURN TO SRINAGAR.](Karakoram_350.jpg "ON THE JHELUM. THE RETURN TO SRINAGAR."){#b350}
::::

Our exertions were over. We let ourselves be borne across the lake and up the
Jhelum, lazily enjoying the landscape, the tall vegetation on the banks, the
branching splendour of the chenar trees, the lively colouring of the
water-fowl—the little grey gulls, the gay kingfishers, the fish-hawks perched
watchfully on the rocks or floating tree trunks, the ducks, the cranes and all
the varied host of aquatic birds.

On August 11th the party re-entered Srinagar, and went to pay its respects at
the Chenar Bagh. The expedition was at an end. All the anticipatory feelings of
the past few days and the satisfying sense of labours completed gave way to a
sense of flatness accompanied by actual longing for the vigorous and varied life
of the past months of contact with nature.

:::


[^1800]: [This panorama, taken with panorama B and the small picture of the lower Baltoro inserted at p 194, gives the whole northern chain of the Baltoro in all its detail.]{.footnote}

[^1801]: [Altitude calculated from barometric readings, referred to the observations made at Skardu, Gilgit and Leh. According to Conway the Skoro La is 17,400 feet; according to the Workmans 16,975 feet. Guillarmod gives the highest figure, 17,716 feet.]{.footnote}

[^1803]: [The route is marked by a dotted line on the little panorama of the left side of the Braldoh valley.]{.footnote}

[^1804]: [The Botanical Appendix, by Prof. Pirotta and Dr. Corlesi, contains a list of the specimens found in this valley.]{.footnote}

[^1805]: [The Skoro La was crossed in 1856 by R. Schlagintweit, by Godwin Austen in 1861, by Conway in 1892, by the Workmans in 1899, and by some of the members of the Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition in 1902.]{.footnote}

[^1806]: [Moorcroft describes similar rafts in use on the river Sutlej, made of ox-hides, like those which Major Bruce says are used to navigate the Indus in Chitral. They are probably much larger, but cannot be nearly so easy to take apart for portage as these of Baltistan.]{.footnote}

[^1807]: [*Skardu*: refer [Skardu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skardu)]{.footnote}

[^1808]: [The Botanical Appendix of Prof. Pirotta and Dr. Cortesi contains a list of the plants collected on the Deosai table-land.]{.footnote}

[^1809]: [*Burgi La*: refer [Burji La](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burji_La)]{.footnote}

[^1810]: [K. OESTREICH (op. cit.); ELLSWORTH HUNTINGTON, *The Vale of Kashmir. Bull. Amer. Geog. Soc.* 38, 1900, p. 657.]{.footnote}

[^1811]: [*Deosai table-land*: refer [Deosai National Park](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deosai_National_Park)]{.footnote}
