# CHAPTER XIX. <br />SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES AND CONSIDERATIONS.  {#twenty .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The explorations of Sir Francis Younghusband east of the Baltoro. — Height of
the Peaks of Golden Throne. — Method employed in Determining Heights. —
Discrepancy between the Barometric and Trigonometric  Calculations, — Climate of
the Karakoram. — Solar Temperature. — Observations made by the Workmans and by
the Duke. — Temperature of the Air at Great Heights. — Physiological
Experiments. — Deductions for the Mountain Climber. — Analysis of Results. —
Physiological Effects of Altitude. — Limits of Adaptability and Endurance. —
Rations and  Alpine Outfit. - Optimistic Forecasts. — The Practical Problem.
 <br/><br />
::::
     
:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_351.jpg ""){#b351}
::::

I HAVE gathered into a single chapter a number of short notes on various topics
which have already been presented or, at least, mentioned in the text,
discussion of which, on account of their technical nature, was not easily
included in the general narrative.

As described in [Chapter XV](#sixteen), the Duke had from Sella Pass and the ridge of
Staircase Peak a comprehensive view of the unknown territory lying east of the
Baltoro and north of the Siachen. Over this tract extends a system of lofty
chains, with corresponding deep valleys (see panoramas
[F](https://flic.kr/p/2niw1X5) and [I](https://flic.kr/p/2niyw2W)), so
complicated that it was impossible for the Duke to form a general idea of its
topographical arrangement, even schematically, or to draw such conclusions as
would be necessary to correlate his observations with those of Sir Francis
Younghusband, the only explorer who has so far penetrated into the region. 

The geographical problem will be best presented by confronting the Duke’s
observations and the results of the Younghusband expedition. I will therefore
present these data as briefly as possible, premising them with the warning that
they will not be easily intelligible without reference to Younghushand’s maps.^[^1900]^

On his first expedition in 1887 Sir Francis Younghusband crossed the whole of
China from Pekin to Yarkand, and returned to India by the old Mustagh pass and
the Baltoro. It was during this journey that he first discovered and crossed the
Aghil chain, which lies between the Kuen Lun and the Karakoram, separating the
valleys of the Yarkand and the Oprang rivers.^[^1901]^ Two years later, returning to the
region by the Karakoram pass, he again crossed the Aghil range at the head of a
small expedition sent out to get information upon the marauding raids of the
Kunjuts of Hunza. He describes the Aghil mountains as running from north-west to
south-east, some 125 miles long, composed of “bold upstanding peaks,” among
which are three beautiful snowy summits, the tallest of which is about 23,000
feet high.

After reaching the valley of the Oprang, Sir Francis Younghusband followed it
up, hoping that it led to the Saltoro pass, a supposititious ancient route of
communication between Baltistan and Kashgar, of which the people south of the
ranges had some tradition but no dependable knowledge of its geographical
situation.^[^1902]^

The valley, which runs from south-east to north-west, lies east of the Baltoro
basin between the Broad-Gasherbrum range and the Aghil mountains. A large
glacier, the Gasherbrum, comes down into it from the eastern slopes of the
Gasherbrums, and stops abruptly at the river with a vertical wall of ice a mile
and a half broad. This the explorer crossed, and went on up the valley to a
second glacier, the Urdok, not so wide as the first, which runs in from the
south between precipitous walls, coming from deep within the ranges to the east
of Hidden Peak. The Oprang valley ends not far beyond to the south-east.
dividing into two glacier-filled branches which form the sources of the river
Oprang. At this point he left the main valley and followed up the Urdok glacier.
It was entirely covered with moraine in its lower part. He went on climbing
toward a sort of depression in the ridge at the head of the valley, thinking
that this might possibly be the sought-for Saltoro pass. He went 18 miles up the
glacier in three days, experiencing continued bad weather, so that he just
barely caught glimpses of the peaks between the mists. On the third day there
was a severe snowstorm. There was considerable danger from the snow-covered
crevasses and the avalanches that came down on every side, and he was finally
brought to a halt by a wide crevasse, probably the bergschrund, and forced to
turn back.

Sir Francis Younghusband was merely making a rapid journey through an extended
territory, and had neither equipment nor leisure for accurate topographical
work: moreover, there were no points previously established by survey upon which
to base his observations. He was able to establish the latitude of some of the
points in his itinerary by astronomical observations, but not the longitude. The
camping around of Durbin Jangal in the Oprang valley, 11½ miles below the
Gasherbrum glacier, was one of these. Its position was established by
calculation of the latitude and observation with the compass upon a certain
striking peak which Younghusband believed to be K^2^ (survey 183° Mg., 186°
true). The situation of the Oprang valley is thus dependent upon that of Durbin
Jangal camp. But in Younghusband's map the valley is so placed that one would be
able to look from Windy Gap and Sella Pass, through short tributary valleys
without glaciers, directly down into it where it lies considerably below the
mouth of the Gasherbrum glacier. However, Sir Francis Younghusband in discussing
with the Duke the topography of the region during the first stay of the
expedition at Srinagar. became persuaded that the peak surveyed from Durbin
Jangal was not K^2^ but Gasherbrum IV, and altered his map accordingly, putting
the Oprang valley six miles farther east. Then the further difficulty arose that
a straight line drawn from the new situation of Durbin Jangal to Gasherbrum IV
would run directly across the mountain ridge to the north-cast of Windy Gap, and
thus the latter would probably cut off the view of Gasherbrum IV from a person
situated about seven miles north of and nearly 10,000 feet below it.

The Duke was forced by the insecurity of the data to leave unsolved the problem
of the topographical relation between the upper Oprang valley and the glacier
basin explored by him. Nor were the factors established by the expedition enough
to warrant the identification of the Aghil chain with the mountain range which
the Duke had seen to the east, and which he and Sella had photographed. They had
both taken with the prismatic compass the angles of Peaks X, Y and Z, and the
point of observation of the Duke upon Staircase Peak was sufficiently well
established. But that of Sella on the east side of the left-hand spur of the
Godwin Austen was too uncertain, as he had as basis only the angles observed
upon the Gasherbrums, which were too few and also too acute. Given the distance
of these two stations from the points X, Y and Z, the slightest displacement
would be enough to alter the situation of these peaks from one to the other side
of the Oprang; and besides, it was impossible to say with certainty whether they
were contained in one or two chains. Furthermore, no one of the larger glaciers
shown in panoramas [F](https://flic.kr/p/2nivUR5) and
[I](https://flic.kr/p/2niyw2W) exactly corresponds in direction with the
Gasherbrum glacier, neither could any of them be followed with the eye for a
sufficient distance to establish its identity with the latter.

In any case, the panoramas taken by Sella and the Duke depict an utterly unknown
region between the Oprang valley, the upper Siachen glacier and the
Broad-Gasherbrum range. It is to be hoped that it will be explored at some early
time, cither by crossing some col at the head of the Kondus glacier, or else by
Sella Pass on the southern side of the Godwin Austen. Such an exploring
expedition would probably collect enough data to bring into line with each other
the maps of Sir Francis Younghusband, Dr. Longstaff and the Duke.

Before leaving the subject of topography, I will make mention of certain angles
taken by the Duke from Camps XIII and XIV on the glacier and on Chogolisa
Saddle. If he had been able to make a third station on the high ridge of Bride
Peak, he would have had sufficient elements to add many topographical details to
the map of the region at the head of the Baltoro. He was prevented by heavy
mists from making this third station, and the distance between the two others
was too small a base upon which to found a triangulation of any exactness.

Nevertheless, the reading of vertical angles permitted some altimetric
calculations which I will set down here. They must, however, be taken as
approximate, on account of the uncertainty of the distances between the peaks
and the observation stations, due to the shortness of the base. According to
these observations the height of the five largest peaks of Golden Throne, from
north to south, would he 22,933, 23,743, 23,386. 23,563 and 23,375 feet high.
The second peak would thus be the highest.^[^1904]^

Conway gives Golden Throne an altitude of 23,600 feet, a difference of only 143
feet between his calculation and that of the Duke; and to Pioneer Peak an
altitude of 22,600 feet, He maintains, however,^[^1905]^ that some 500 feet should be
added to these figures, because on comparing the altitude deduced from
barometric observations made at Junction Camp (on the Baltoro at the height of
the mouth of the Vigne glacier) with that based on the readings of angles of
K^2^, he found the latter to be greater by 500 feet. The results of our
observations do not agree with these deductions of Conway. First of all,
according to our triangulation, the end of the right spur of the Vigne, about
1,100 yards away from Junction Camp and a little higher up, proved to be 15,738
feet high, hardly 70 feet more than the altitude given by Conway—in other words,
the trigonometric calculation agrees with the barometric. Further, the
observations of angles made from Camps XIII and XIV to points triangulated by
the Indian Trigonometrical Survey gave differences of not more than from 150 to
300 feet in their heights, and always in excess; from which one may argue that
the figures calculated for Golden Throne are likewise approximately correct, and
in any case give a higher rather than a lower figure. I must, however, note that
the observations of the Duke do not tally with those of Conway so well for
Pioneer Peak as for the other points—in fact, one deduces from the angles taken
a height of only 21,332 feet for it, 1,268 feet below Conway’s figure.^[^1906]^

The Duke also observed Mustagh Tower from the same camps, but its distance from
the short base of observation was too great to rely upon the result. I should
say, however, that the angles observed would give a height of between 23,950 and
24,950 feet. Conway had estimated it at about 25,000 feet.^[^1907]^

A few further observations upon the altimetric data brought back by the
expedition may be in order here, with special reference to those of the region
of which we made a topographical survey. They are of two kinds: those derived by
intersection from the photogrammetric or tacheometric stations, and those
deduced from the calculations of atmospheric pressure made by the Duke with the
Fortin mercury barometers (taking into account temperature and tension of
aqueous vapour), corrected and referred to the observations taken at the same
time at the base station at Rdokass. As I have already said, the latter —137 in
number—were collated with the memoranda of local observations made at the
meteorological stations of Skardu, Gilgit, Leh and Srinagar. In constructing the
map, the figures obtained by triangulation were naturally adopted, with the
exception of a few which it was not possible to determine by triangulation, and
of which the barometric calculation is given instead. These points are marked on
the map by a small *b* after the number. All the results obtained by calculation
of pressure are incorporated in the tables of Prof. Omodei (see Appendix). It
will be seen that the height of some points was taken by both methods—by
intersection and by comparison of barometric readings. Upon comparing these a
discrepancy becomes apparent, as shown in the following table :—

:::: { .wrap-100  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_356.jpg ""){#b356}
::::

The divergence is considerable and hard to explain satisfactorily. The
calculations based upon barometric readings consistently give lower figures than
the trigonometrical ones. Thus it is improbable that errors caused by local
variation of pressure are responsible for the divergence. Moreover, these are
excluded from consideration by the remarkable steadiness of the barometer in the
Karakoram, and by the fact that all the calculations were obtained by reference
to Rdokass, at no great distance away, in the same valley. The height of the
latter had been determined by a long series of operations extending through a
period of six weeks and referred to the four Kashmiri stations.

In truth, the singular fact that the variations between the altitudes calculated
by intersection and those calculated by barometric readings are all in the same
direction gives rise to a doubt whether some constant factor does not intervene,
such as one might find, for instance, in the local conditions of gravity. It is
known that gravimetrical observations have revealed a considerable nucleus of
attraction in the Himalayan mass. It does not seem unreasonable to suppose that
this fact might not only produce a local greater density of the atmosphere, but
also give rise to the movement of a certain volume of air from the surrounding
regions, in the same way that the attraction of the earth masses is the cause of
the higher level of the sea on the coasts of the large continents. Obviously
this absolute increase in mass of atmosphere would result in higher barometric
pressure than would correspond to the local altimetric figures, and bring about
a variation precisely in the direction indicated by the figures of the
expedition.

I am aware of the fact that geodetic surveyors in general are disposed to place
little reliance upon altimetric calculations based upon atmospheric pressure.
But the Duke proved that the method, when employed with due caution, may give
results differing very little from those obtained by triangulation. Witness the
remarkable agreement between the result of Russell’s triangulation of Mount St.
Elias in Alaska and the barometric calculations of its height; and the fact that
the Duke's measurement of the seven principal peaks of the Ruwenzori, determined
by observations of pressure, were almost precisely confirmed by the
triangulation of the Boundary Commission appointed to define the limits between
Uganda and the Congo. A much greater divergence has often been betrayed between
two different triangulations of the same points.

On the other hand, the topographical survey was made by the method which secures
the best control of results and the greatest guaranty of exactness, and which
forms a permanent document to the work accomplished in the photogrammetric
panorama made on the Paganini method. Nevertheless, the specific conditions
under which the work was accomplished brought in their train inevitable causes
of error. Of these, the chief is the necessity that existed of making all
observations of very high mountains from the bottom of valleys very deep and
relatively narrow. Such great perpendicular distances in combination with such
small horizontal ones did not permit the exact collimation of many points. Thus,
one was never sure of sighting the exact summit of the mountain in question, nor
of seeing exactly the same point from the various stations. Naturally neither
the trigonometrical peaks nor the others which were selected as base points for
the determination of the stations had on top the signal which makes it possible
to achieve an exact focus with the telescope. Thus it was impossible to be sure
that a point collimated from various stations was always the same one, and not
another either higher or lower or displaced horizontally. In addition, it was
generally impossible to join up the different stations, because they were
usually not visible one from another on account of the great surface
irregularities of the glacier, even though they might be close together. The
smallness of our numbers, the shortness of the time, the difficulties in the way
of reaching and climbing the steep valley walls, prevented us from making
stations at high points. These inconveniences are not inherent in the method of
survey adopted, and would have operated adversely on any other that we might
have chosen. For the reasons I have given, the survey of the expedition is
called a “sketch,” and not a topographical map.

With all these sources of error and uncertainty, it seemed to the Duke wisest to
publish both sets of height statistics. They would have lost all significance if
we had given merely the arithmetical mean between them. As it is, when the
causes of error are finally understood, one of the two sets will be confirmed
and have a definite value.

The meteorological observations made by the Duke serve another purpose beside
that of determining height. Taken in connection with the data of other
explorers, they will give some general indications of the climate of the region,
interesting from more than one point of view.

It is already evident that the high glacial basins of the Karakoram have a
special climate, quite different from that of the regions round about. It
suffices to mention the enormously high rate of atmospheric precipitation as
contrasted with the extreme dryness of the surrounding country. This is
certainly caused by the mighty ranges which reach up into the upper air and
snatch from the south-west monsoon all the moisture that has escaped the lower
Himalayan ranges.

A point which has attracted the attention of several explorers is the great
intensity of the sun’s rays at these lofty heights. R. Strachey called attention
to it as early as 1851,^[^1908]^ and Sir A. Cunningham gives some comparative readings of
solar temperature made in 1850. He noted at Gualior, in the plains, a maximum
solar temperature of 132.8°; at Simla (7,500 feet) of 133.3°; and at Rupshu, on
the plateau of Ladakh (15,500 feet) of 144° and 158° F.^[^1909]^

The Workmans contend that the solar temperature varies proportionately with the
altitude. From several of their publications I have compiled the figures given
in the following tables. They show, indeed, that the high altitudes have higher
temperatures than the plains, but scarcely evidence a regular progression from
low to high.

:::: { .wrap-100  }
![SOLAR TEMPERATURES OBSERVED BY W. HUNTER AND F. BULLOCK WORKMAN, IN 1899, ON THE CHOGO LUNGMA GLACIER.^[^1910]^](Karakoram_359.jpg ""){#b359}
::::

During the summer of the same year the maximum solar temperature observed at
Calcutta was 162° F., and at Lahore 172.6° F.

:::: { .wrap-100  }
![SOLAR TEMPERATURES OBSERVED BY W. HUNTER AND F. BULLOCK WORKMAN, IN 1906, IN SURU AND THE NUN KUN GROUP.^[^1911]^](Karakoram_360.jpg ""){#b360}
::::

It is hardly permissible to compare, as the Workmans do, the highest solar
temperature with the minimum atmospheric, the two things being quite distinct,
and the solar temperature varying quite independently of the atmospheric.

The solar temperatures given by the Workmans are higher than any noted by our
expedition. I have tabulated our results likewise. They also show that there is
not a constant relation between altitude and temperature. I have not included
the lowest records taken on days of cloud or bad weather. Moreover, the
exceedingly variable and uncertain conditions prevented our making regular
observations, hence the fragmentary character of the data. The reading of the
solar thermometer was done at 8, 10 and 4 o’clock, at the same time as the
observations made at Rdokass and in Kashmir. Thus the midday record—which would
naturally he the highest—does not appear. According to the Workmans the maximum
was attained between 12 and 2 o’clock. At no place or time did we have excessive
heat or feel such consequences of it as headache, dizziness, &c.


:::: { .wrap-100  }
![SOLAR TEMPERATURES OBSERVED BY THE DUKE.](Karakoram_360a.jpg ""){#b360a}
::::

Next, as regards the temperature of the air, I need only record the relative
mildness of the month of July, at heights between 20,000 aud 23,000 feet. The
lowest temperature registered at Chogolisa Saddle was 3°; on the ridge of Bride
Peak (24,600 feet) at 2 o’clock on a day of heavy fog the temperature was 21°.
These are also about the records for the month of June on the Savoia glacier and
at Windy Gap. The fact has some importance, on account of its bearing upon the
problem of ascents to great heights, since one of the adverse arguments often
adduced is the extreme and intolerable cold that must exist at such altitudes.
In reality there does not obtain upon the mountain slopes an actual
proportionate relation between the rise of the altitude and the fall of the
thermometer, because other factors, such as the radiation from the earth and the
warm currents rising from the valleys, always intervene to modify the
temperature.

In the Introduction I have tried to bring out the impossibility of applying to
mountain climbing the theoretical physiological it derived by scientists from
experiments on the effects of reduced atmospheric pressure upon the human
system. Such experiments simply serve to establish the general fact that the
system is capable of enduring for a short time, without serious consequences, an
atmospheric pressure that would correspond to an altitude three times as great
as that of Mount Everest. But the simple conditions of artificially reduced
pressure in a closed chamber hardly exist under natural circumstances—for
instance, in balloon ascents the effect is entirely different. Altitudes of
between 29,500 and 36,000 feet in other words, a condition of atmospheric
pressure far less reduced than that easily endured in the closed chamber—have
been known to cause serious organic disorders and even death to some
experimenters. Yet in such ascents the only additional factor, not present in
the former experiment, would seem to be the cold of the high altitude. It is
plain that there is no useful deduction to be drawn from these facts for the
field of mountain climbing, where so many and various factors are present, the
chief of them being (1) the muscular exertion and (2) the incomparably longer
duration of the experiment.

The work of Angelo Mosso and his school has stimulated modern physiologists to
undertake a systematic study of the effects of high altitude upon the human
organism, with the aid of all the most recent analytic methods. The
establishment of the observation hut Margherita on the Gnifetti Peak of Monte
Rosa (15,100 feet) sprang from the initiative of Angelo Mosso, and has been
carried out by the Italian Alpine Club. To-day, enlarged by the addition of new
buildings, it has become an important scientific station for biological research
and physical experiments at high altitudes. It s gradually producing a series of
results which will materially assist in solving the problem of life at great
heights.^[^1912]^ This is not the place to enter upon more details, since the results
thus far achieved do not contribute to the precise matter in hand—the problem
of the greatest height to which man can ascend. On this point only purely
empirical evidence exists, such as is embodied in all the narratives of mountain
climbing which we possess. And unfortunately the experience of mountaineers
varies to such a degree and the effects attributable to altitude alone are such
inconstant factors and so hard to distinguish, that it is almost impossible to
gather any general conclusions from them.

One strange and unexplained fact is that on certain mountains and in certain
regions ascents to great heights almost without exception cause what we call
mountain sickness, varying in symptoms and intensity according to the
individual, whereas other regions are apparently free. Mont Blanc has always had
an evil fame in this regard, and all the accounts of mountain climbing in the
Andes lay stress upon the sickness caused there by high altitude.^[^1913]^ However,
since the repeated ascents of Mount Aconcagua,^[^1914]^ the highest peak in the world
outside the Indo-Asiatic chains, this fact has lost all practical importance.
The problem of altitude has now concentrated itself upon the Indo-Asiatic
ranges. And it looks thus far as if this, the most wonderful field of activity
for the mountaineer that exists on the face of the globe, were also the field
where the bad effects of rarefaction upon the human system are less to be
apprehended than elsewhere.

The progressive history of mountain climbing, from its inception down to the
present day, seems to show that man’s power of endurance and capacity for
exertion at great heights have steadily increased. There was a time when every
ascent of Mont Blanc meant serious suffering—severe headache, dizziness, nausea,
debility, disturbances of the respiration and circulation, sometimes hemorrhage.
To-day no trained mountain climber ever thinks of such possibilities when making
the ascent, and we have conquered 23,000 feet of altitude without sufferings in
any way comparable to those we read of in the early days of Alpine climbing.

One would say that mountain sickness, once a necessary evil of mountain
climbing, is gradually disappearing, in the same way that scurvy has ceased to
be the inevitable accompaniment of polar expeditions. The reason doubtless lies
in the development and perfecting of the equipment, and in the gradual increase
of knowledge as to the best plan of life and work under conditions of high
altitude. Such knowledge reduces to a minimum the exertions, the fatigues and
the dissipation of energy, and leaves the climber in the best condition for the
actual achievement of his feat of conquest.

The Duke’s expedition offers the clearest proof that men can live for extended
periods of time, in possession of healthy functional activity of all their
organs, at an atmospheric pressure little more than half of normal. Twelve
Europeans and fifteen coolies lived for about two months at above 17,000 feet of
altitude, working regularly and not showing a single case of illness, even of
the most fleeting character, attributable to mountain sickness. At the end of
our campaign seven Europeans spent nine days at a height of more than 20,700
feet, during which time four of them camped for the night at 21,673 and 22,483
feet, and this without even the inconvenience of sleeplessness. They likewise
made two steep ascents, through deep soft snow, to 23,458 and 24,600 feet,
without exhaustion, without lowering of morale, without exaggerated difficulty
of breathing, palpitation or irregularity of the pulse; and with no symptoms of
headache, nausea or the like. The fact of their immunity admits of but one
interpretation—*rarefaction of the air, under ordinary conditions of the high
mountains, to the limits reached by man at the present day (12&nbsp;9/32;
inches) does not produce mountain sickness.* Moreover, rarefaction of the air is
not incompatible with mountaineering work, if this is done very slowly and
methodically. From this it follows that the phenomena which have to this day
been considered to be the result of rarefaction are, in reality, phenomena of
fatigue, or merely incapacity (temporary or permanent) of the system to sustain
the exertion of climbing, manifesting itself with special symptoms under the
presence of the particular external conditions which prevail in the mountains.

None the less, the experience of the expedition was not one of absolute
immunity. The atmosphere of those heights did work some evil effect, revealing
itself only gradually, after several weeks of life above 17,000 feet, in a slow
decrease of appetite and consequent lack of nourishment, without, however, any
disturbance of the digestive functions. It was possible for the lack of appetite
to increase and become almost absolute repugnance to food, if after its
appearance one moved and established oneself at a greater height. Thus, at
Chogolisa Camp the Duke and the guides had given up meat and lived on soups,
coffee, tea, chocolate and biscuits. In the two ascents above 23,000 feet their
only food all day was a little chocolate, although they suffered no nausea or
other unpleasant sensations. Of course, in the long run, this insufficient
nourishment would cause a lowering of vitality, loss of flesh and a certain
amount of anemia. However, the process is so slow that we were still at the end
of two months in condition to make long marches without experiencing excessive
fatigue.

The Eckenstein-Pfannl-Guillarmod expedition seems to have suffered the same
decrease of appetite and strength, which Guillarmod attributes to the use of
tinned foods. All the former experience of the Duke was against this
explanation. On the expeditions to Alaska (Mount St. Elias) and Africa
(Ruwenzori) and on the much longer polar expedition, there was never any
repugnance to the tinned foods nor any evil traceable to their use. They were
chosen for the Karakoram campaign with the same care as on the other occasions,
and came from the same factories. There is no reason to suppose that of
themselves they would have any different effect. I am of opinion that the loss
of appetite is due instead to incomplete oxidation of waste products or their
slower elimination. In either case there would be a gradual accumulation of
noxious products in the system, sufficient to explain the symptoms that showed
themselves. This theory would also account for the difficulty, already
mentioned, with which even a very robust system regained its balance after a
slight disturbance, and for the distinctly bad effects of inactivity. Whether
the conversion of products were incomplete or only sluggish, movement would be
the best stimulant to proper metabolism.

The gradual depletion of force which I have described gives a negative answer to
the much debated question on the subject of acclimatization. Perfect adaptation
to surroundings is not possible above 17,000 feet. In this view both
Schlagintweit and Longstaff concur. The latter mentions that the highest
altitudes inhabited by man are the goldfields of Thok Jalung, in Western Tibet,
16,500 feet high, and certain Lamaist monasteries of the same region, 15,000
feet above sea level, from which it would seem that some 17,000 feet would be
the limit of permanent endurance.

A curious fact showing how up to a certain point the system undergoes
modifications adapting it to life at great heights, is that the people of upper
Ladakh are averse to descending lower than 10,000 feet, and positively refuse to
go below 7.000 feet for fear of illness. This is mentioned by Knight. and I had
the opportunity of verifying the fact. Perhaps there exists such a thing as
"mountain sickness" caused by abrupt change from lower to higher pressure. To it
may possibly be attributed, at least in part, the exhaustion of the Duke and the
guides on the way from Chogolisa Saddle to Askoley. Conway relates that he had
more difficulty in breathing when he went down the Baltoro after climbing
Pioneer Peak than he experienced during the whole ascent.

I give here a table showing the composition of our daily ration :—

:::: { .wrap-100  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_366.jpg ""){#b366}
::::

To these were added Liebig's extract, coffee, tea, onions, salt, pepper and
mustard. We used ship’s biscuits, which take the place of bread excellently
well, even for long periods. They were made in Italy, and specially prepared
without salt, as they keep better so. Our soup paste was very small, for cooking
at 175° F., at which temperature water boils at an atmospheric pressure half of
normal. Our meats were Australian, of two or three kinds, but always very simply
prepared. In such enterprises the complicated, so-called appetizing cookery
employed is most of the tinned foods of commerce is very much better avoided.

We took with us some whiskey to use medicinally or in occasional celebration of
some special achievement. But alcohol was excluded from our habitual diet. I
cannot concur in the opinion of Conway and Guillarmod that it is necessary to
well-being and a useful stimulant.^[^1915]^

Next to the question of food, that of clothing as protection against the cold is
of importance. A double sleeping-sack (of eiderdown and pelt) is a necessity.
With it one is protected from cold of several degrees below freezing, even when
the tent is set up on ice and snow. The usual weight of woollens used for
mountaineering is sufficient, worn double if necessary. Special attention must
be paid to the shoes.

Mountain climbing at exceptional heights is attended with a long record of
frozen feet, the cause of which may be, as many believe, retarded circulation.
On our expedition we all wore a special sort of boot, devised by the Sellas for
winter climbing on the Alps. There is a piece of coney skin between the lining
and the leather. The nails must be driven in at the edge of the sole, in such a
way that the point comes outside of the upper leather, and thus cannot conduct
any heat away from the foot. In their ascent of Kabru Rubenson and Monrad Aas
they had to remove the nails from their boots to keep their feet from freezing.
On exceptionally cold mornings we wrapped our feet and legs in pieces of woollen
stuff held in place by the straps of the crampons. We had no cases of
frost-bitten feet throughout the campaign.

I have mentioned that none of us felt any ill effects from the solar radiation,
but we all wore our solar helmets all the time. Neither did we suffer to any
great extent from snow rashes or *eritema solaris*—of course, this varied with
the individual, but all of us were able to keep it within bounds by using
lanoline.

I have already emphasized the experimental value possessed by the Duke’s
expedition on account of the special conditions under which it was made. Thus it
is unnecessary for me to discuss in detail the opinions of various other
explorers on the question of attaining high altitudes. They are almost all more
optimistic than formerly. In 1892 Conway still doubted that it was possible to
reach 24,000 feet, but he has surrendered to the accomplished fact. Dr. and Mrs.
Workman are the greatest sceptics, and their view has weight because both of
them have ascended to over 23,000 feet in the Himalaya and the Karakoram. Yet an
analysis of the arguments upon which they base their opinion shows them all to
be contradicted by the experience of our expedition. It has disproved their
assertion that it is impossible to sleep properly or protect oneself from cold
at and over 21,000 feet; or that rapid diminution of strength appears above
20,000 feet, or serious mental incapacity, loss of will power, etc. Dr. Workman
has compiled a set of statistics showing that of the fifteen Europeans who took
part in their various expeditions, twelve reached 21,000 feet, seven 22,570
feet, six 23,000 feet, five 23,300 feet, and only three 23,480 feet. These
figures could have value only if they had been obtained for fifteen persons
starting at the same time in equally good condition of health and vigour to make
the same ascent. Unfortunately, parties of fifteen persons cannot make ascents
above 23,000 feet, on account of the obvious impossibility of transporting the
necessary equipment.

Putting aside all these objections, the logical conclusion to be derived from
our expedition is that, under present conditions, altitude is not to be
considered as in itself an obstacle to an ascent. Our experience rather tends to
prove that, if there is a physiological limit, we are still far from reaching
it. The real difficulty to be confronted and solved is the one of transport. In
this respect conditions in the Himalaya are most favourable. It has been said
that the coolies form one of the great difficulties to be wrestled with in an
expedition to the Himalaya. But our experience is quite the contrary—namely,
that without their excellent qualities as porters it would be impossible to
organize expeditions in this region. Their uncommon strength and powers of
resistance, their temperateness, their amenable and gentle dispositions, and
their capacity for hard work have already been recognized by all those whom they
have served from one end of the Himalaya to the other. A single dissenting voice
has little weight in the verdict in their favour.

Our expedition can heartily concur in this verdict as far as the Baltis arc
concerned. We succeeded in persuading them to camp for several days running
above the snow line, and there is no doubt that they would adapt themselves to
living without fire if they were supplied with alcohol or paraffin stoves to
boil their water and tea. We also induced them to eat some of our food, such as
biscuits and butter—a fact not without practical bearing on the subject under
discussion. The Baltis are good rock climbers, and quickly learn to walk on the
glaciers and steep snow slopes. When they are properly equipped, and if one
meets half way with a little sympathy and humanity their natural fears and
timidity, one can do anything one likes with them.

Major C. G. Bruce, who is probably better acquainted than any other European
with the peoples of the western Himalaya, has recently written some words of
wisdom, which I take pleasure in quoting here, for they contain excellent
counsel to all future travellers to those regions:—

“The transport question throughout the Hindu Koosh and Himalaya is undoubtedly a
difficulty, but in my opinion should not be so great a one as many recent
travellers have found it. They, however, are generally handicapped by being
unable to communicate direct with the people and by not understanding their
point of view. The different native races are much worse fed, certainly worse
clothed, and probably more superstitious regarding the great mountains than the
Swiss were 100 years ago, and yet there was considerable difficulty at that
period in getting even the best chamois hunters to undertake any new bit of
exploration. What would have happened if a whole village had been ordered to
send every available man with some unknown Englishman, and to stay with him for
a fortnight above the snow line, is better imagined than described, yet this is
what must necessarily occur in the Himalaya. It will therefore be understood
that to get the best work out of men who cannot be expected to go, as a body,
anything but most unwillingly, requires tact, sympathy and understanding
kindness towards them, as well as considerable assistance in the matter of extra
food and clothing, if they are to be employed for any length of time.”^[^1916]^

It is not only the coolies who need education. Mountaineers and guides have to
train their senses to understand and measure the new conditions of a world built
upon proportions so incomparably larger than those of the familiar Alps that the
judgment even of the most expert is found wanting. They have to learn to
estimate the obstacles, the inclination of the slopes and ridges, the height and
nature of the rocks, the complications of the ice and snow, all the chances and
difficulties of mountain climbing, which can only be successfully met if they
are recognized before one enters upon the conflict with them.

The history of mountaineering in the Himalaya is only just begun. Perhaps a time
will come when new De Saussures and new Whympers will appear in the field and
repeat the story of the conquest of the Alps.


:::

[^1900]: [SIR F. E. YOUNGHUSBAND, *The Heart of a Continent*, etc. London 1904, 2nd ed. There are better maps in the articles by the same author in *Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. N.S.* vol. 10, 1888, p. 485, and vol. 14, 1892, p. 205.]{.footnote}

[^1901]: [The Aghil chain had been seen by G. W. HAYWARD as early as 1868, but he believed it to be the Mustagh or Karakoram. See *Journey from Leh to Yarkand and Kashgar. Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. 14*, 1869, p. 41; and the article in *Jour. Roy. Geog. Soc.* 40, 1870, p. 33.]{.footnote}

[^1902]: [The Saltoro pass was discovered by Longstaff in the summer of 1909, the year of the Duke’s expedition. It does not cross the watershed, but gives access to the Siachen or Saichar glacier; hence it is not a way of communication between India and Central Asia, but merely a short cut between the lower Shyok and the upper basin of its tributary, the Nubra.]{.footnote}

[^1904]: [Result of calculation. In his lecture before the Soc. Geog. Ital. and the Club Alp. (see *Boll. R. Soc. Geog. Ital.* Ser. IV, 11, 1910, p. 435; and Revista C. A. I.,  Jan. 1910, vol. 29) the Duke stated that the highest peak was one of those to the south-east, meaning the fourth, which instead turns out to be 180 feet lower than the second. But this small difference is indecisive, as a slight error in the reading of the angles or in the calculation of the distance would be enough to produce it.]{.footnote}

[^1905]: [SIR W. M. CONWAY, *Climbing in the Himalayas.*  London 1894, p. 486; *Alp. Jour. 27,* 1894. p. 33.]{.footnote}

[^1906]: [As was plain from Conway’s map and description, Pioneer Peak is not visible from the Concordia nor from the Godwin Austen glacier; thus Guillarmod’s critical observations on its height are without foundation.]{.footnote}

[^1907]: [If Mustagh Tower is above 23,000 feet high, it is certainly far from the 26,250 feet of Guillarmod’s estimate.]{.footnote}

[^1908]: [P. R. STRACHEY, *On the Physical Geography of the Provinces of Kumaun and Gahruval,* etc. *Jour. Roy. Geog. Soc.* 21, 1851, 57.]{.footnote}

[^1909]: [SIR A. CUNNINGHAM, *Ladakh and Surrounding Countries.* London 1854.]{.footnote}

[^1910]: [W. HUNTER WORKMAN and  F. BULLOCK WORKMAN. *In the Ice-World of Himalaya*. London 1901.
]{.footnote}

[^1911]: [W. HUNTER WORKMAN. *Exploration of the Nun Kun Mountains,* etc. *Geog. Jour. 31, 1908, 12; W. HUNTER and F. BULLOCK WORKMAN, *Peaks and Glaciers of the Nun Kun. London 1909.]{.footnote}

[^1912]: [Among the principal works dealing with the subject, beside the well-known book of ANGELO MOSSO, *La fisiologia dell uomo in montagna,* see H. ZUNTZ, A. LOEWY, F. MÜLLER and W. CASPARI, *Höhenclima und Bergwanderungen,* etc. Berlin 1906; and the latest publications of R. F. FUCHS in *Sitzungsb. d. physik.-mediz. Sozietät in Erlangen,* vol. 40. 1908, and vol. 41, 1909. Dr. T. G. LONGSTAFF has brought out in his monograph *Mountain Sickness* (London 1906) the bearing which these scientific researches have upon mountain climbing in its practical aspect, and the conclusion to be drawn from them relative to the phenomena of mountain sickness. He gives a succinct history of mountain climbing from this point of view, and the lessons to be drawn from it. See also two articles by MALCOM HEPBURN, *The Influence of high Altitudes in Mountaineering.  Alp. Jour.* 20, 1901. p. 368: and *Some Reasons why the Science of Altitude Illness is still in its Infancy. Alp. Jour. 21*, 1902, p. 161.]{.footnote}

[^1913]: [See in general the volume of E. WYMPER, *Andes of the Equator.* London 1892, and *The Highest Andes,* by E. A. FITZGERALD (London 1899); also articles by the same author in *Geog. Jour.* 12, 1898, p. 469. and *Alp. Jour.* 19, 1898, p. 1.]{.footnote}

[^1914]: [S. VINES, *Aconcagua and Tupungato. Alp. Jour.* 19, 1898, p. 565.]{.footnote}

[^1915]: [On this point I desire to mention DR. L. SCHNYDER’s *Alcool  et alpinisme* (Geneva 1907), containing the results of a thorough enquiry made among mountain climbers, the large majority of whom gave their opinion against the use of alcohol in mountain climbing. This agrees with the scientific researches which have resulted in the classification of alcohol among the depriments rather than among the stimulants. True stimulants are tea, coffee, cocoa. If one has ample portage facilities one may carry a small quantity of alcohol to use after the day’s work is done—but it ranks as a luxury, not as a necessity.]{.footnote}

[^1916]: [MAJOR THE HON. C. G. BRUCE, *Twenty Years in the Himalaya,* London 1910.]{.footnote}
