# APPENDICES.  {#twentyone .unnumbered}

## APPENDIX A. 

:::: { .fs-xxl .align-center }
<br />PHOTOGRAMMETRIC SURVEY<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center }
On the scale of 1 : 100,000<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xs .align-center }
IN THE<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xl .align-center }
KARAKORAM (WESTERN HIMALAYA).<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-s .align-center }
Comprising Part of the Upper End of the Baltoro Glacier and the Godwin Austen and Savoia Glaciers.
::::

:::: align-center
****
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center }
BY<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-l .align-center }
FEDERICO NEGROTTO CAMBIASO,<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center .break-after }
Ship’s Lieutenant. 
::::


### PHOTOGRAMMETRIC SURVEY.

#### I.—Selection of the Method followed in the Execution of the Survey.

::: justified

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_375.jpg ""){#b375}
::::

THE Godwin Austen glacier, the two branches of it which surround to west and
east the main mass of K^2^, and the buttresses that enclose these, were surveyed
by photogrammetry. This special method, invented by the geographer Comm. Pio
Paganini, formerly an officer in the Royal Italian Navy, has been adopted by the
Military Geographical Institute of Florence for the surveying of high mountains.
Thanks to the painstaking studies of many years and to the instruments devised
and perfected by Comm. Paganini, his method has attained the highest degree of
simplicity and practical utility, and may with advantage replace all other
topographical methods in difficult or inaccessible regions. It is especially
adapted to steep mountains and large glaciers, to places beyond the frontier or
such as are occupied by the enemy; to unhealthy districts; finally, to any place
where long and tiresome marches leave little time for surveying with the plane
table, tacheometer and theodolite.

In surveying high mountainous regions with the plane table, the Military
Geographical Institute has abandoned the use of the tape. The same may be said
of the tacheometer, which under the circumstances serves as a theodolite. The
points for the survey are always determined by intersection. Then all the
directions at points useful for the survey must be observed and noted on the
spot, either with the plane table, the tacheometer or the theodolite, and
supplemented by numerous sketches to help later in making the map. The method of
the plane table, although it has the advantage of enabling one to reproduce
natural features on the spot, takes, on the other hand, more time at each
station. Moreover, in case of bad weather it is not easy to keep the drawing
from being injured in the process of execution, and finally the apparatus is
difficult to transport in the high mountains.

With the photogrammetric method all the required directions to the points may be
obtained afterwards from the photographs taken from properly chosen stations.
The photographic apparatus is provided with special measuring devices to furnish
the photographic perspectives with the elements needed for the survey. In the
field the only point of similarity between this method and earlier ones is the
determination of the stations by taking bearings to surrounding trigonometrical
points. This determination may if necessary be made at home with the panoramic
views, provided the points are well defined, as is the case in the high
mountains, where they usually consist of sharp and conspicuous summits. Thus
with the photogrammetric method all that has to be done out of doors is the
adjusting of the instrument, the taking of the panoramic views and the noting in
the field book the orientation and bearings to the trigonometrical points
necessary to determine the station. Other notes may be taken: as of the
directions which may help to determine with greater precision such distinctive
points as may be useful points of reference for subsequent stations; or to fix
the perspective when the number of trigonometric points is insufficient; or to
obtain at once a trigonometrical net connected with one or more bases measured
directly. This would be necessary in lands where no measurements had previously
been taken. The photogrammetric method consists in taking in the field a series
of views from different stations, and these pictures serve later as the basis of
all those operations which under any other method must be performed on the spot.
There is further the advantage that we can determine as many points as we want
according to the scale adopted and the amount of detail we wish to give to the
map. The Paganini apparatus supplies vertical topographical perspectives, upon
which are traced two orthogonal axes. The intersection of these axes coincides
with the principal point of the perspective, which by construction is also the
meeting of the optical axis of the lens or of the camera with the plane of the
image. Of the two perpendicular axes traced on the negative and thence
transferred to the positive, one is the line of the horizontal plane which
passes through the view-point of the perspective, and thus represents the
horizon of the station; the other is the line of the vertical plane which
contains the optical axis of the camera; hence also the view-point and the
principal point of the perspective itself. This holds good, of course, only when
the necessary adjustment of the apparatus is made previously. In order to use
the photographic perspectives thus obtained for mapping the ground which they
represent, it is necessary to know the distance of the view-point from the plane
on which they are formed—in other words, the length of the perpendicular line
drawn from the said point to this plane. As in our case we are dealing with
photographic perspectives in which the ground shown can be considered to be at
infinity,^[^2000]^ their point of view coincides with the second nodal point of the
lens, and the principal focal length of the latter represents the length of the
aforesaid distance. The lens of the Paganini apparatus is provided with a
graduated scale in millimetres and tenths of millimetres, in order that this
length may be taken with precision. It is determined once for all at the
beginning of work, by bringing into the focal plane distant points and making a
series of observations in order to arrive at a mean value approximating the true
one. With the help of the graduated scale it is easy to keep this value constant
in all the perspectives obtained during the survey. Paganini calls this value
the “indicated focal length,” to distinguish it from the one determined
afterwards at home for the perspectives on paper, which serve for the actual
construction of the map. For further particulars the reader is referred to the
hand-book mentioned above. This factor is most important because it establishes
the relation between the dimensions of the objects and those of the
corresponding images on the perspectives. It must be determined therefore with
the greatest care and, when necessary, corrected by calculations before setting
to work on the survey.

Another element which must be established upon the spot is the orientation of
the perspective: that is, the horizontal angle made by the optical axis of the
camera (in other words, the perpendicular line from the view-point to the
perspective) with the direction to a previously determined point in the field of
operations; or, failing this, the azimuth of the optical axis, given by a
compass attached to the apparatus. The outdoor work, therefore, is reduced to
the following steps: (1) The adjustment of the instrument; (2) the rectification
of the level or of the verticality of the axis of rotation; (3) the execution of
the panorama (preferably in the first perspective intersecting with the vertical
wire some signal point or conspicuous point previously fixed, in order to
orientate the panorama with as great precision as possible); and (4) the
observations of zenith and azimuth—or of the latter alone, as in the case of the
apparatus used by the expedition of the surrounding trigonometrical points
necessary to fix the position of the station, with the addition at most of
certain conspicuous points which may later be of value as reference points for
locating other stations in cases where geodetic points are unavailable.

#### II.— Description of the Apparatus.

PAGANINI has invented various types of photogrammetric apparatus for the use of
the Italian Military Geographical Institute. They are manufactured by the
Galileo Company, of Florence. However, when the expedition wished to furnish
itself with an instrument, this firm had only one on hand, a model of 1897,
arranged by Comm. Paganini for surveys on the scale of :50,000 and 1:100,000 in
Erithrea. This model, however, though less in weight, bulk and price, and
possessing the greatest simplicity and ease of manipulation, is not altogether
adapted for work in very high mountains. We had to content ourselves with it,
none the less, as the time was too short for the construction of a new
instrument. Paganini has recently invented a marvellously ingenious one, which
unites all the advantages I have mentioned with that of the higher degree of
precision possessed by the model furnished with the vertical circle, which was
an earlier invention.

The pattern of 1897 has a short focal length (18 centimetres) and takes plates
18 by 24 centimetres (7 by 9½ inches), with the larger side horizontal in order
to take in the entire horizon with an equipment of six plates. It may be
employed successfully in Erithrea, and has given brilliant results in Russian
work in Transbaikalia and Transcaucasia, where the district is less rough and
the differences of level less pronounced than in the Alps and the Himalaya. But
in the photogrammetric work executed on the Baltoro and Godwin Austen glaciers
the panoramic views could not all include the highest peaks, as was, of course,
desirable, because the vertical dimension of the plates was too limited to
embrace the enormous difference of height between the stations and the
surrounding summits. Moreover, the instrument was not furnished with the
vertical circle and telescope, as in the other Paganini models; thus the
bearings to the most important points had to be taken by means of the vertical
wire as seen through the ground glass; and others, as also the heights of the
points, had to be determined at home by the co-ordinates z and y of their images
measured on the perspectives. These facts simplified the outdoor work very much,
but increased the labour afterwards in obtaining the data for the construction
of the map. Undoubtedly this apparatus enables the work to be done very quickly
on the mountains, and reduces to a minimum the time spent by the operator while
exposed to discomfort and bad weather. He must note the indispensable data.
These are recorded in a field book, together with such subsidiary observations
as sketches to facilitate the locating of the points in the panoramas, names,
routes followed, time of exposure and other miscellaneous information. The
apparatus has also the great advantage of maintaining unaltered for a long time
the adjustments made before beginning work—a fact which contributes much to the
success of the observations. A brief description of the apparatus will make this
plainer.

It consists of a rigid camera, made of aluminium, in form a right prism, the
base of which is an isosceles trapezium. The back of the camera, which is
perpendicularly placed upon the largest of the parallel sides of the trapezium,
consists of a frame holding the ground glass or the sensitive plate. The front
of the camera has fixed at its centre a tube, inside which runs another tube
adjustable by means of a screw with a millimetre thread. To this the lens is
fixed. A graduated scale in millimetres, which has as origin the focal
plane—that is the surface upon which the images are received—is marked
externally along the fixed tube, while to the movable tube carrying the lens is
attached a ring with a sharp edge which comes into contact with the fixed tube.
Thus, turning the inner tube in order to move the lens backward and forward
causes the edge of the ring to cut the graduated scale, and thus serves as
fiducial line or line of collimation, indicating on the scale itself the
distance of the lens from the focal plane. The bevelled edge of the ring is
divided into ten equal parts in order to read upon it the divisions of the
movable tube—in other words, the tenths of the thread of the screw. This, added
to the whole number of millimetres read on the fixed tube, gives in millimetres
and tenths of millimetres the distance of the second nodal point of the lens
from the focal plane. This value, the "principal mndicated focal length,” is
determined at the beginning of the campaign, and in all subsequent operations
care must be taken that the line of collimation of the tube carrying the lens is
so adjusted as to give always the same value. This was carefully determined upon
the apparatus of the expedition before leaving Srinagar, and gave a result of
180.3 millimetres.

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-right  }
![PAGANINI PHOTOGRAMMETRIC APPARATUS, 1897 MODEL.](Karakoram_379.jpg "PAGANINI PHOTOGRAMMETRIC APPARATUS, 1897 MODEL."){#b379}
::::

The objective is a Zeiss anastigmatic and belongs to a special series of wide
angulars for photogrammetric work. With a small diaphragm we obtain a clear
image 40 centimetres in diameter; with the f-35 diaphragm it produces a clear
image free from distortions upon a plate of 20 by 26 centimetres. Thus the plate
18 by 24 centimetres used with this camera took very clear images over its
entire surface, even when a large aperture diaphragm was employed; while the
luminosity is so great that it is better to use plates of only medium rapidity,
or, better still, orthochromatic ones, as we did. The perspectives thus obtained
have a horizontal field of 67° and a vertical one of 54°. In this way, with six
perspectives with a displacement of the optical axis of the camera about the
vertical axis of the apparatus of 60° for each of them, a panorama is obtained
which comprises the whole horizon, plus a narrow vertical band—a horizontal
field of 3° 30´ between each one and the next. This vertical band in excess is
indispensable, to ascertain the correctness of the panorama, to determine the
distance of the point of view from the perspectives, and to join the positives
accurately to one another in order to form the panorama. As the vertical field
is 54°, one can measure from the perspectives and vertical angles up to 27°.
Owing to the enormous differences in level with which the expedition had to
contend, a larger vertical field would have been more advantageous. In the new
apparatus of Comm. Paganini it is possible to adjust the camera so as to have
the larger dimension of the plate (24 cm.) run vertically, giving angles of
height or depression up to 33° 30´. To make the entire circle of the horizon
eight plates would be necessary, with a horizontal displacement of 45° of the
optical axis, giving a vertical band of 4° 30´ between each two contiguous
pictures. The new instrument, being capable of reduction to telescope and being
furnished with the vertical circle, can, even without the reversible movement I
have described, take the angle of peaks whose summits fall outside the upper
margin of the plate. This arrangement, too, would have been very useful in the
construction of the map.

In all the Paganini apparatus the optic axis of the lens is fixed in a direction
perpendicular to the plane of the image. The intersection of the above axis with
this plane is marked photographically by the intersection at right angles of two
very thin silver hairs stretched before the ground glass on the back of the
camera in such a way that they can be easily withdrawn or replaced in case of
breakage. The horizontal silver hair, once adjusted, serves, as I have said, to
indicate the horizon line upon the photographic perspective. Below the camera
are three arms bent at right angles, one anterior and the others posterior. Each
has a hole in its end, through which passes an adjustable shaft fixed
perpendicularly to the movable plate or alidad of the horizontal circle. The
camera can be fixed rigidly at the required position upon the alidad by means of
nuts and bolts screwed on to the shafts. This position remains, if possible,
invariable throughout all the outdoor work. Its stability is very important,
since the said position must satisfy the requirement that the plane containing
the optic axis of the camera and the axis indicating the horizon of the station
is exactly horizontal as soon as the rotation-axis of the alidad or of the
instrument has been vertically disposed. Thus the only adjustment to be made of
the instrument in the different stations is to correct the level placed on the
alidad, at the same time arranging vertically the rotation-axis of the
apparatus.

The azimuthal circle of the apparatus has a diameter of 14 centimetres and its
edge is graduated from 0° to 360°, each degree being subdivided into two equal
parts, each of which embraces 30’. The vernier is fastened to the movable plate
or alidad, and permits us to read the minutes and to appreciate even the 30´. In
addition to the three shafts and a level, the alidad is provided with a
magnifying lens to use with the vernier and a regulating-screw to use for the
small adjustments of colimation. The verticality of the rotation-axis of the
instrument is attained by means of three levelling-screws, which pass through
the top of the tripod and hold the horizontal circle. This is fixed upon the
tripod by means of a clamping-screw with a spring and a handle, which, passing
through the head of the tripod from bottom to top, is screwed into a movable
support shaped like a half-sphere, fastened by means of a ring under the
horizontal circle.

A compass of the Dixey or the Smalcalder type is mounted upon the top of the
camera. It can be so adjusted that the vertical visual plane of its bearings
coincides with the direction of the optic axis of the camera. Thus it becomes
possible to use the compass to orientate the panorama when it is not possible to
aim at trigonometric points or at any others of which the position is known. The
tripod may be taken to pieces; each foot is in two parts^[^2001]^ which can be solidly
fastened together when the apparatus is set up. We have seen that the most
important adjustment consists in fixing the camera upon the alidad in such a way
that the plane containing the optical axis and the silver hair which traces the
horizon-line upon the perspectives are perpendicular to the rotation-axis of the
instrument; and reciprocally, when this rotation-axis is adjusted vertically
the plane of the optical axis will be horizontal. In the other apparatus of
Paganini this result is attained by means of the telescope of the acclimeter,
which may be inverted (pattern 1884), or by the same camera obscura reduced to a
reversible telescope (pattern 1889). In the model employed by the expedition the
horizontal adjustment is made as follows:—

The three arms of the camera are first placed at approximately the same height
upon the movable plate by turning the lower screws with the pins belonging to
them, having previously raised the upper ones m order to give free motion to the
arms on their respective shafts. Then looking through the ground glass of the
camera under the black cloth, and moving to right or left and up or down as
necessary, by adjusting the screws, distant points are brought to coincide with
the point of intersection of the wires, until by moving the camera in both
directions around the rotation-axis, a point is made to run all along the
horizontal thread from one extreme to another, without passing above or under
the thread. If the rotation-axis is vertical, this coincidence of a point with
the horizontal thread in its whole length can only take place when the plane of
the optical axis and the wire which traces the horizon-line on the perspective
are horizontal. If the plane is not horizontal, and accordingly the plane of the
ground glass is not vertical, one observes that in moving the camera to right or
left the image gradually diverges from the horizontal wire, describing the
segment of a hyperbola either above or below the wire, according as the point
cited is situated above or below the horizon.

In practice the following method will secure the horizontal adjustment of the
wire and the plane of the optical axis:—

First turn the screws which support the posterior arms of the camera, operating
in such a way that by revolving the camera all the way through its field some
distant point which is covered by the wire on one of its ends coincides with the
other end of the wire. Thus the horizontality of the wire will be fixed. If this
point is not on the horizon, it will be seen to describe a curve during the
revolving of the camera, passing above or below the intersection of the wires
according to the inclination of the optic axis downwards or upwards. The vertex
of the hyperbola will be found upon the vertical thread, and it will be easy to
estimate the convexity of the said curve. Then the screw controlling the
anterior arm of the camera will be turned, and the latter raised or lowered
until the image of the point is brought to coincide with the intersection of the
wires. By making observations of successive points continually approaching the
horizon, the right position will soon be arrived at, when all the screws are
tightened in order rigidly to maintain it.

#### III.—Calculations and Construction of the Map.

TRUE panoramic view obtained under the above conditions gives an image of all the
field seen from the station. Together with other panoramic views obtained in
like manner at suitable stations, it gives the elements necessary for the
execution, on any scale, of the map of that tract of land which they represent.
Each perspective of the series is considered separately in constructing the map.
The focal distance is equal for all, and all are furnished with the horizon-line
and the line of the vertical plane, the latter containing the visual point and
the principal point of the perspectives.

Paper positives are used for making the survey, it being possible to allow for
the alteration undergone by one single quality of paper and to use a focal
length corrected accordingly. This focal length is obtained before proceeding to
the survey. It is independent of the “indicated focal length,” and is called the
“real focal length.” All the directions to the points represented in each
picture may be easily determined by means of the co-ordinates *x* and *y* of their
images referred to the perpendicular axes traced on the picture itself, through
the following very simple equations:

:::: { .wrap-30 .align-center  }
![(1)](Karakoram_382a.jpg ""){#b382a}
::::

where *f* is the real distance of the view-point from the perspective, the
orientation of which ω’ is known, being an element obtained at the station; and
ω’  is the angle made by the horizontal direction to a point (x, y) of the
perspective with the perpendicular to it from the view-point.

:::: { .wrap-40 .align-center  }
![(2)](Karakoram_382b.jpg ""){#b382b}
::::

where 𝛼 is the angle that the direction to the image of the point observed
makes with its projection upon the horizon, that is to say, with the horizontal
direction of the point itself. But also it is

:::: { .wrap-30 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_382c.jpg ""){#b382c}
::::

where L is the difference of level between the point considered and the station and
D the horizontal distance between these points. Hence

:::: { .wrap-30 .align-center  }
![(3)](Karakoram_382d.jpg ""){#b382d}
::::

After having obtained by formula (1) the bearings of the various points useful
for the survey, which are visible on the panoramic views taken from two or more
stations, the position of these may be obtained by intersection.

By formula (2) we get their angular elevation; then, having the distance and the
difference of level between the points and the station, by means of tables in
use at the Military Geographical Institute, one can finally obtain directly the
vertical difference by means of formula (3).

But this is a very long method, and in order to solve the equations given above
it is necessary to have the numerical value of the co-ordinates *x* and *y* and
the distance . These numerical values are very useful when the survey is on a
very large scale, as in civil or military operations; whenever it is a question
of data for finding points on the ground. But they are superfluous for a
topographical map on a small scale, as in the construction of the map these
values would have in any case to be reproduced graphically.

#### IV.—Simplifying the Survey by means of Special Drafting Instruments.

BY the Paganin photogrammetric method adopted by our Military Geographical
Institute, the position of the points and their elevation can be taken
mechanically and rapidly by means of special drafting instruments, the
construction of which is based upon the above formula, and upon which the
distance *D* and the coordinates *x* and *y* are transferred directly with the
compass and upon the scale of the map, making it unnecessary to know the
numerical value of these measurements.

The construction proceeds in the following manner: the trigonometric points are
fixed at the desired scale by means of their rectilinear co-ordinates. Then with
the special instrument called by Paganini “*rapportatore ad origine variabile,*”
the photogrammetric stations are put in place, as well as whatever other special
points have been selected for the purpose of adding to the points of reference
in a number proportionate to the scale of the survey. With this instrument the
various directions can be traced directly on the transparent paper just as they
were read at the time of the outdoor operation on the horizontal circle of the
photogrammetric apparatus or the theodolite. With the transparency thus made are
placed the stations and the directions from them to the other images necessary
to determine further points of reference in addition to the trigonometric ones.
With this instrument it is possible to assume any one of the bearings observed
as origin of the horizontal circuit and to proceed by degrees, by means of the
alidad, to the other readings. In this way is obviated the necessity of all the
mathematical calculations to reduce to zero the readings made out of doors, as
is the case when the ordinary finders are used—a very long operation when there
is a large number of points to be located.

When the stations and all the points intersected by them have been put on paper,
we proceed to the determination of the secondary points, or detail, all chosen
beforehand for the purpose of the draft. After the various elements of the
panoramic views have been corrected, a selection is made from them (taking them
two by two, at contiguous stations) of points useful to the survey; either for
the purpose of tracing contours, or for determining the lie of various ridges,
the direction of streams, the limits of glaciers, bases of rocks, &c. The
operation is regulated for the number of points chosen according to the scale
that is desired, the precision required, and the time at the disposition of the
operator. All these points have been registered in the notebook, according to
the station from which they were taken, and marked on the relative panoramic
views with numbers or letters written in red ink.

:::: { .wrap-80  }
![PAGANINI DRAFTING INSTRUMENTS USED IN CONSTRUCTING THE MAP.](Karakoram_384.jpg "PAGANINI DRAFTING INSTRUMENTS USED IN CONSTRUCTING THE MAP."){#b384}
::::

The tracing on the design of all directions to these secondary points used to be
a very long and monotonous operation and far from accurate. The modern process
is quick and simple, thanks to a special drafting instrument based upon the
formula (1) quoted above, and called the '"graphical sector for the directions
to secondary points of the perspective.” By its means the horizontal projection
of each perspective is traced successively upon the design, carefully
orientated, with its principal point at the effective distance from the station
point, in such a way that, by transferring with the compass the abscissa of the
various points taken on the views to a scale cut on a metal ruler, the
corresponding horizontal directions may be easily drawn by means of 2 movable
plate (or alidad) furnished with a metal ruler, moving about the station point.

With another instrument, specially designed for drawing the elevations, based
upon formula (2) and (3), differences of level are obtainable, and therefore
also the elevations of the stations and of the secondary points of the
retrospectives. When the apparatus is provided with vertical circle and
telescope the angular elevations of the trigonometrical points are read directly
on the ground. In this case one obtains the elevation directly from reading the
instrument, by means of the distance on the design between the station point and
the trigonometrical point of which the altitude is known and from the station
point to the observed angle α.

But without the vertical circle the determination of the heights depends upon
the value of the abscissa and the ordinates of the trigonometric points of the
perspectives, the height of which is taken with the compass on the perspectives
themselves, likewise their graphic distances; so that the differences of level
between them and the station point, and also the height of the latter, may be
read directly upon the instrument. In the same manner, once the height of the
stations is obtained, the difference of level is determined, and therefore the
height of the secondary points of the perspective considered useful to complete
the survey. As in the case of all the other methods, corrections must, of
course, be made of all these apparent differences of level, on account of the
refraction of the light and the roundness of the earth. Tables compiled for the
purpose are used.

#### V.—Topographical Work of the Expedition and Construction of the Survey.

IN a little more than a month—in other words, from May 25th to July 2nd—the
expedition executed twenty-two photogrammetric stations, using 106 negatives. On
account of the limited number of plates at our disposal, not all the panoramic
views embraced the entire horizon. The region surveyed includes the Concordia
amphitheatre of the Baltoro glaeier, the Godwin Austen ¢lacier up to Windy Gap
and the Savoia glacier, which flows about the western side of K^2^.^[^2002]^ It was a
pity that lack of plates prevented our extending the survey southward, upon the
arm of the Baltoro as far as Bride Peak, the ascent of which was one of the aims
of the expedition. The work was supplemented, it is true, by compass and
tacheometer and with barometrical stations; but among the inumerable peaks of
such strange appearance the eye becomes easily confused in passing from one
station to another. The numerous sketches taken on the spot did not give all the
information really desirable for map-drawing, and are certainly inadequate to
give all the characteristic detail of this rugged, broken and largely
inaccessible region. Sella’s numerous photographs and panoramic views were, on
the other hand, of great assistance in making the design, as some of them were
taken from high and commanding elevations and under conditions making it
possible to determine approximately the photogrammetric elements, so that they
served,if not for measurements of altitude, at least for sufficiently exact
azimuthal directions. With this end in view, Sella marked his stations by
setting up cairns visible from the photogrammetric stations, so that they could
be included in the network of stations of reference or geodetic points upon
which the survey was based.

It is possible that instead of glass plates we might have used films, which are
so much more convenient because of their small bulk and weight. Comm. Paganini,
however, does not consider their use advisable, as no good results have been
obtained with them in three previous campaigns. They easily undergo changes in
the celluloid, owing to their sensitiveness to heat, cold, moisture and the
chemicals used in developing; so that the image varies in a way which would not
be noticeable in ordinary photographic work, but which is sufficient to cause
errors in the measurements, which must be corrected to the tenth and hundredth
of a millimetre.

The Military Geographical Institute was authorized to execute the topographical
representation of the region surveyed by the expedition. It confided the work to
Comm. Pio Paganini. The scale chosen for the map was 1:100,000. The work proved
somewhat arduous, especially at the beginning, on account of the deficiency of
well-defined geodetic points, which necessitated referring the survey to several
conspicuous points determined by intersection—in other words, concluded from
vertices of the secondary triangulation executed for Kashmir, which is, in its
turn, connected with the North-western Himalayan series of the primary
triangulation of India. A double chain of triangles (quadrilateral and diagonal)
of the secondary triangulation of Kashmir extends along the course of the Indus
from south-east to north-west, from a point very near its sources to as far as
Skardu, where it bends southwards in order to join up with the main system of
the Indian survey. From the vertices of this portion of the trigonometric chain
(Upper Indus triangulation) were intersected the highest summits of the
Karakoram, including the two Masherbrums, Peak No. 8 or Bride Peak, Peak No. 9
or Hidden Peak, Nos. 10, 11 and 12 of the Gasherbrum range, and lastly and
highest of all Peak No. 13 or K^2^—all these summits surrounding the tract which
was to be mapped. But we must consider that these points were intersected at
distances of 50 and 100 miles with cross-bearings meeting at acute angles and
taken from relatively low points, while there were no signal stations to mark
with precision the points aimed at, and thus it was not possible to determine
their position otherwise than approximately. However, the following table shows
the elements of the points which were used for the purpose in question. It was
not always easy to recognize them as they appeared on the perspectives. They
were measured also with the tacheometer from several stations, as is shown on
the sketch of the triangulation.

:::: { .wrap-100  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_386.jpg ""){#b386}
::::

We see that the figures most to be trusted are those for Masherbrum East; the
other Peak, or South-east, was omitted because it was invisible from the region
surveyed, being masked by the first, which is only about 1,000 feet from it. The
tract surveyed was comprised within a square formed by Masherbrum, Bride Peak,
Hidden Peak and K^2^. Thus a point was chosen for the origin of the rectilinear
co-ordinates which was the approximate centre of this square—that is to say,
about at the intersection of the meridian 76° 35´ E. with the parallel 35° 45´.
The graduation of the longitude in the final survey was put 2° 30´ farther east,
according to the correction made in 1877 to the longitude of Madras, upon which
are based the longitudes of the triangulation of India.

The most distant point, Masherbrum, is about 15 miles from the origin of the
co-ordinates; as the origin itself has the latitude of 35° 45", nearly the same
as the southern end of Italy, the elements for the calculation of the
rectilinear co-ordinates are already to be found in the appropriate tables.^[^2003]^
They result from the formulae:

:::: { .wrap-40 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_387a.jpg ""){#b387a}
::::

in which *L* is the latitude and *P* the longitude of the point; *I~0~*, *II~0~*,
and *III~0~*, are constants which depend upon the origin of the co-ordinates of
latitude *L* and longitude *P*. The value of these constants is obtained from
the aforesaid tables and calculated with the Bessel ellipsoid elements:

:::: { .wrap-40 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_387b.jpg ""){#b387b}
::::

*N* and *p* are respectively the great normal and the radius of curvature of the
meridian ellipsis for latitude *L*. For the points before mentioned, with the
relative geographical co-ordinates given by the catalogue contained in Vol. VII
(Division E, Group I, No. 13), Triangulation of Kashmir, the following
rectilinear co-ordinates were obtained :—

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_387c.jpg ""){#b387c}
::::

Thus it was possible to fix the above points on the drawing on the scale of
1:100,000, proceeding afterwards to the necessary adjusting by means of the
sides, using the well-known formula:

:::: { .wrap-40 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_388a.jpg ""){#b388a}
::::

where the angle ϕ is given by the formula:

:::: { .wrap-40 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_388b.jpg ""){#b388b}
::::

This formula may also be used for distances over 30 miles. *S* is the length or
side unknown: *L~0~&nbsp;=&nbsp;L~m~&nbsp;+&nbsp;ϵ* where *L~m~*, is the mean latitude and *ϵ* a
little correction omitted in case of distances under 25 miles. *N~0~* and *ρ~0~*
are the principal radii of the ellipsoid, in correspondence with latitude
*L~0~*. Thus were obtained the following distances :—

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_388c.jpg ""){#b388c}
::::

The circuits of the horizon, executed from different stations and transferred to
the drawing by means of the finder, serve also to fix on the design the
photogrammetric and tacheometric stations, and also to determine those other
significant points which are to be used as points of reference for further
stations and for the orientation of the perspectives. This was indispensable,
for the photogrammetric stations scattered over the Savoia and Godwin Austen
glaciers, not all of which could take in three points of the Indian
Triangulation, could by this means be located with sufficient exactness on the
drawing.^[^2004]^

Two positives were printed of each of the panoramic views, one for composing the
panoramas themselves, the other to measure with the compasses the coordinates of
the points useful in the survey, after having chosen and distinguished them on
the views. The effective distance of the perspective view-point was then
determined on the unmounted prints. All these being taken under the same
conditions and with a constant indicated focal length, and the same quality of
paper being used for printing, always cut the same way of the fibre, the result
must be a constant value for the effective distance, in all the printed
positives. This value is determined by getting the mean of various measurements
made on several perspectives and for different panoramas^[^2005]^. The focal length
indicated by the lens in our case was 180.3 millimetres. and the true focal
length determined at Florence was 180.6 millimetres. After having chosen and
marked in red on the perspectives the various secondary points to be mapped, and
transferred their absciss upon the sector in accordance with the directions
already described, and properly orientated on the drawing, the directions to the
said points of the various stations are traced, and by intersection their
position in the survey is obtained. Some 300 points were determined in this way.

Finally, in the same way, by carrying the abscissa and ordinates upon the finder
for altitudes the heights of the said points were determined by at least two
derivations. With the help of all these points and the stations and references
fixed upon the panoramas, it was possible to complete the map, inserting the
details and forms of the region—in which the panoramas were of the greatest
assistance.

The difficulty of the ground, the scarcity of trigonometric joints, the
impossibility—owing to the enormous differences of level—of accurately sighting
trigonometric summits unprovided with signals, the short time at our disposal,
the limited number of photographic plates, all this prevented us from gathering
sufficient elements for a true topographical survey. However, we may feel some
satisfaction over the result achieved under such conditions. It has at all
events sufficient accuracy to serve as point of departure for other explorers
making a more extended survey in the same field.

In conclusion, I must express our gratitude to Comm. Paganini, to whose methods
and whose instruments we are almost wholly indebted for the work executed on the
spot, and to whose experience and assistance we owe the execution of the map. My
zeal to make known an admirable topographical method, remarkable for its
simplicity and its suitability for high mountain work, has led me to describe it
in considerable detail. For, despite the fact that this method has been employed
in Italy, with the best results, since 1876, and has been introduced also in
certain foreign countries, the English Royal Geographical Society does not
mention it, even in its most recent publications (*Hints to Travellers,* 9th
ed., 1906; and *Maps and Map Making*, E. A. REEVES, 1910); and, in fact,
considers the application of photography to topography to have a very limited
and subordinate value. The June number of the *Geog. Jour.,* 1911, has an
article by A. O. WHEELER, of the Topographical Office of the Canadian
Government, in which full justice is rendered to the photogrammetric method, and
which will no doubt contribute toward making it better known in England.

:::

:::: break-after
::::

## APPENDIX B. 

:::: { .fs-xxl .align-center }
<br />METEOROLOGICAL DESCRIPTION<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center }
AND<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xxl .align-center }
ALTIMETRIC CALCULATIONS<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xs .align-center }
From Observations made by the Expedition of.<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-s .align-center }
H.R.H. THE DUKE OF THE ABRUZZI.
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center }
IN THE<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xl .align-center }
KARAKORAM
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center }
AND<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-xl .align-center }
WESTERN HIMALAYA.
::::

:::: align-center
****
::::

:::: { .fs-xxs .align-center }
BY<br />
::::

:::: { .fs-s .align-center .break-after}
Prof. DOMENICO OMODEI.<br />
::::

::: justified

### I.—LIST OF INSTRUMENTS USED.

:::: { .wrap-40 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;&nbsp;](Karakoram_394.jpg ""){#b394}
::::

THE expedition was equipped with the following instruments for making the more
important meteorological observations, especially those used for computing
heights:—

I.  One mercurial Fortin barometer, No. 3314, with graduated scale from 240 to
520 millimetres. Id. No. 3313, with graduated scale from 240 to 520 millimetres.
Id. No. 3312, with graduated scale from 210 to 490 millimetres. Id. No. 1, with
graduated scale from 200 to 400 millimetres.
II.  Two aneroid barometers furnished with three graduated scales for altitudes
to 29,000 feet. 
III.  One hypsometer with three pairs of thermometers:—
      * 1st from 58° to 78° in tenths.
      * 2nd from  65° to  88°  in tenths.
      * 3rd  from 72° to 102° in half-tenths.
IV.  Two pairs of thermometers maximum and minimum self-registering.
V.  Four mercurial thermometers.
VI.  Two standard thermometers.
VII.  Four thermometers with bulb blackened in vacuum. 

All the above instruments were verified at the National Physical Laboratory at
Kew, with the exception of the hypsometers. Of these the pair from 72° to 102°
had already been used on the Ruwenzori expedition, and the others were
manufactured and corrected in Geneva. 

The correction of some of the mercurial Fortin barometers remained uncertain for
lack of apparatus with which to compare them at such unusually low pressures;
but this was compensated for by making numerous comparisons under low pressures
in the mountains. In this way it was possible to use all the barometers.

These instruments, in consequence of their special construction, are very
fragile, and unfortunately the damage is not easily discovered by external
marks, so that the observations may be very erroneous if not taken with great
caution. It is necessary for this reason to submit them to continual comparison
in order to give assurance of their regular working. A great many of these
comparisons were made both with the barometers and the hypsometers—in fact every
time the opportunity arose—and always with reference to No. 3314, of which the
exact correction was known. Especial care was taken to preserve this barometer
from deterioration.

In order to render the following table more concise, only those results are
given which were obtained from the various series of comparisons, some of which
were made before the highest ascents, some at the most elevated points and some
during the descent.

:::: { .wrap-100 }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_394a.jpg ""){#b394a}
::::

The table shows that despite the difficulty of transportation, the
correspondence of the barometers was very satisfactory, so that the results
obtained are quite reliable. It is important to note that the greatest number of
observations were taken with barometers Nos. 3314 and 3313 (No. 3312 was used in
the base camp at Rdokass); and that the observations with the hypsometer were
always taken at the same time (with two, and sometimes with four thermometers)
to avoid all chance of error. The readings of the thermometers (within the
limits of approximation of the instrument) were always in accordance with those
of the barometers.

Only limited use was made of the aneroids. However, they were compared from time
to time with the mercurial Fortin barometers in order to keep them ready in case
of need. The experience acquired in Africa on the Ruwenzori, as well as on the
present expedition, has positively demonstrated that one cannot rely upon the
indications given by the aneroid barometers, however accurate their
construction, on account of the unavoidable shaking up they get in
transportation. The hypsometer was carried as a substitute for the mercurial
barometers in case of breakage, and also for those ascents on which it might not
be possible to carry the barometers. The hypsometer certainly gives a less
degree of precision than the mercurial barometer. The error of one-tenth of a
degree (which is not unlikely to occur owing to the difficulties attending the
observations) would cause a corresponding error in the pressure of about two
millimetres, an error not possible to the readings of the mercurial barometer.

To ensure the greatest possible degree of accuracy, the use of the hypsometer
was constantly associated with that of the mercurial barometers; because, though
no doubt the results it gives have a smaller degree of precision, it may be
useful in detecting the presence of any disturbing agent in the Fortin
barometers—the penetration of an air bubble, for instance, which is the
commonest and the most to be feared. With few exceptions, use was made of the
sling-thermometers for measuring the temperature of the air. These are certainly
preferable to the stable ones, although long usage proved fatal to several of
the instruments. They enabled us to obtain the measurement of the tension of
vapour and of the humidity of the air, their bulbs being covered with a sheath
of cotton soaked m water.

In order to get an approximate idea of the intensity of the sun’s heat,
thermometers with the bulb blackened in vacuum were used.

In providing the above instruments, the Duke was perfectly aware of the just
criticism usually made by scientists upon determinations of this nature. But he
contented himself with little, not being able to obtain the best.^[^2006]^

The carrying of a meteorological cage would have been difficult, and its
advantage was problematical. Therefore the following arrangement was adopted for
the exposure and reading of the instruments.

At Rdokass, where the period of the observations was most extended, the
instruments were hung on a cross-piece about three feet high, held up by two
stakes, while a waterproof cap of convenient height served to protect them from
rain and sun at every hour of the day. For the other stations a wooden tripod
was employed, covered with a strong canvas cap, under which the instruments were
suspended in such a manner as to secure free circulation of air.

The hours of observations indicated in the following tables correspond always to
the local time at which the observations were taken in the observatories of
India, the data of which were considered as terms of comparison.

The greatest accuracy was aimed at in taking the observations—as far as the
sometimes very difficult circumstances would permit. The comparison of
barometers, which I have described above—which might satisfy the requirements of
a laboratory rather than the conditions of an arduous campaign—is sufficient
demonstration of the care and circumspection practised. In the tables that
follow are given all the observations taken by the expedition from Gund to
Tragbal, between April 25th and August 8th.

The readings of the barometers have been corrected for instrumental error,
reduced to 0°, and for gravitation; corresponding corrections for all the other
readings being made in the same way.

The tables showing the observations as they were entered in the note-book on the
spot, though they refer to only a limited period of time, form a valuable and
interesting addition to our knowledge of the climatology of these distant and
still little known regions.

### II.—TABLE OF RESULTS.

....


### III.—ALTIMETRIC CALCULATIONS.

BESIDE the results obtained by his own observations, which are given in the
preceding pages, the Duke gathered a very large harvest of data from the
meteorological observatories of India, in order to get the terms of reference
required for the calculation of the altitudes. As results from the above data, a
first base station was fixed at Rdokass, at an altitude of about 13,000 feet,
well up on the Baltoro glacier, on which were taken observations of pressure,
temperature and humidity for a period lasting from May 29th to July 15th.

Afterwards a second base was fixed at an altitude of about 16,000 feet (Camp
III) at the very foot of K^2^, beside other secondary ones, in order to secure
nearer points of reference for the calculation of the height of the points
reached in the various ascents. These calculations were made on the following
basis:—

For all the stations before Rdokass and for those from Bride Peak onward the
calculation of the various heights was made by comparing them with the
simultaneous readings taken at the stations of Leh, Skardu, Gilgit, and in some
cases with those taken at Srinagar as well. All observations taken at stations
higher than Rdokass (from May 29th to July 15th), which formed the principal
objects of the expedition, were compared with those taken simultaneously at
Rdokass, except for the two last, after July 15th, when owing to a
misunderstanding the observations at Rdokass were discontinued.

For the station near Bride Peak, which was the highest point reached, comparison
was made with the readings taken at the four stations of Leh, Srinagar, Skardu
and Gilgit.

Of the results given in the foregoing pages, those were especially taken into
consideration for which the simultaneous data of reference were secured, these
being complete (that is to say, not only the pressure but also the temperature
of the air and the tension of vapour were known). In some isolated cases the
hour of observation was not the same as that of the reference station; in this
case the readings were compared with those taken at the nearest hour, without
attempting to obtain values by interpolation, which would necessarily have been
unreliable.^[^2007]^

When all the necessary data were known for the two stations of reference—in
other words, the pressure, the temperature and the vapour tension—the well-known
formula of Rühlmann was employed to calculate the differences of level:—

:::: { .wrap-50 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_410.jpg ""){#b410}
::::

in which

|       *Z*&nbsp;=&nbsp;the difference of level between the two stations;

|       *H~0~*&nbsp;=&nbsp;the corrected pressure at the lower station;

|       *H*&nbsp;=&nbsp;the corrected pressure at the upper station;

:::: { .wrap-10 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_410a.jpg ""){#b410a}
::::

<br />the mean between the temperature of the air at the lower station and at the
upper station;<br /><br /><br /><br />

:::: { .wrap-10 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_410b.jpg ""){#b410b}
::::

<br />the mean between the vapour tension at the lower station and that obtained at
the upper station;<br /><br /><br /><br />

:::: { .wrap-10 .float-left  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_410c.jpg ""){#b410c}
::::
<br /><br /><br /><br /><br />

| *λ* = the latitude;

| *ζ*  = the height of the lower station above sea level.<br /><br />

The calculations were made by means of the Tables *météorologiques
internationales,* Paris, 1890.

In those cases where only the pressure and the temperature of the air were
known, the tension of vapour not being determined, the formula used was that
given in the *Annnuaire pour l' an 1909 publiƈ par le Bureau des Longitudes,* in
which are also included some tables that facilitated the calculations. The
formula is as follows :—

:::: { .wrap-50 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_410d.jpg ""){#b410d}
::::

in which

:::: { .wrap-50 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_410e.jpg ""){#b410e}
::::

the symbols having the same meaning as before.

In this approximate formula no account is taken of the humidity of the air, but
to make up for this we have assumed 0.004 as the coefficient of expansion of the
air instead of 0.00367.

When it is only a question of isolated observations, we consider this formula
more than sufficient in consequence of the uncertainty of the law of decrease of
temperature with increase of altitude.

For further proof, and to show more clearly the value that we can attribute to
the individual observations in the pages that follow, we give in addition to the
observations taken by the Duke those obtained simultaneously at the reference
stations, drawn as far as Leh and Srinagar are concerned from the data obtained
from the central observatory at Simla, and for those of Skardu and Gilgit from
the observatory of Srinagar.

It is not necessary to enter here into the value of the barometric method in
calculating altitudes. If this method is not on the whole to be compared with
the geodetic in precision, still, used with care, it may lead to very
satisfactory results.

We give in the following table the measurements obtained by the Duke in 1906 in
the Ruwenzori group by means of barometric measurements and those taken two
years later with the geodetic method by Major R.G.T. Bright,^[^2008]^ during the labours
of the Boundary Commission for the delimitation of the boundaries of the Congo
Free State :—

:::: { .wrap-100 .align-center  }
![&nbsp;](Karakoram_411.jpg ""){#b411}
::::

Practically identical results were also attained in the determination of the
altitude of Mount St. Elias :—

* Altitude determined by the Duke with barometric method, 18,090 feet. 
* *Id.* by Russel (by triangulation), 18,100 feet.
* *Id.* by I. K. MacGrath, U.S. Coast Survey (by triangulation), 18,024 feet.

But there is no doubt that the best results are those obtained from a long series
of observations, and that greater uncertainty remains in the case of those based on
isolated observations, especially when the tension of vapour has not been determined.

The last table contains a summary of all the altimetric data.

#### DATA OF OBSERVATION AND COMPARISON.

....


## APPENDIX C. 

S. 559


:::

:::: align-center
****
::::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^2000]: [Cf. PAGANINI, *Fotogrammetria.* Milan U. Hoepl 1901.]{.footnote}

[^2001]: [In the original instrument the feet are in one piece.]{.footnote}

[^2002]: [See the heliotype reproduction of the photogrammetric panorama [(S)](https://flic.kr/p/2niEcfX) given on a natural scale as an example of the work done.]{.footnote}

[^2003]: [See *Istituto Geografico Militare. Istruzione per la resoluzione div alcuni problemi riguardants e relazioni di posizione fra punti dati per le loro coordinate geografiche.* Florence, Barbera, 1896.]{.footnote}

[^2004]: [See the sketch of the triangulation, whereon are marked all the points which served for
the construction of the survey.]{.footnote}

[^2005]: [For description of this determination see the monograph already cited and the *Manuale* of COMM. PAGNINI.]{.footnote}

[^2006]: [On the Ruwenzori expedition the Duke had carried among other instruments an excellent Ångström attinometer, but owing to its bulk and the great difficulty of its management, which required a reflecting galvanometer, he was unable to make use of it as he had hoped.]{.footnote}

[^2007]: [The observations at the most elevated point, near the top of Bride Peak, were taken at half-past two p.m. on July 18th, and for the calculations the comparisons were made with observations taken at 4 p.m. in Leh, Srinagar, Skardu and Gilgit. From the data given by these observatories it follows that on July 18th the pressure for Leh. Srinagar, Skardu and Gilgit respectively was at 10 a.m. 497.15, 623.94, 575.15 and 631.66 millimetres, and at 4 p.m. 493.96, 619.90, 572.20 and 627.78 millimetres. Thus the pressure at 2 p.m. was presumably much higher than at 4 p.m. assumed for the calculations, and hence the altitude of the highest point reached is probably some 66 feet higher than the figure obtained. But this supplementary computation was not made, because it was a question of an isolated observation, and also because little was known of the daily variation of the pressure in those regions.]{.footnote}

[^2008]: [*Survey and Exploration in the Ruwenzori and Lake Region, Central Africa.* By Major R. G. T. BRIGHT, C.M.G., *Geog. Jour.* Aug. 1909, XXXIV, p. 128.]{.footnote}

